# Writing Re-usable Test Code

One of the biggest challenges with Selenium tests is that they can be brittle and challenging to maintain over time. This is largely due to the fact that things in the application you're testing change -- causing your tests to break.

But the reality of a software project is that _change is a constant_. So we need to account for this reality somehow in our test code in order to be successful.

Enter Page Objects.

## A Page Objects Primer

Rather than write your test code directly against your app, you can model the behavior of your application into simple objects and write your tests against them instead. That way when your app changes and your tests break, you only have to update your test code in one place to fix it.

With this approach we not only get the benefit of controlled chaos, we also get reusable functionality across our suite of tests and more readable tests.

## An Example

### Part 1: Create A Page Object And Update Test

Let's take our login example from earlier, create a page object for it, and update our test accordingly.

First we'll need to create a new folder called `pages` in the root of our project (just like we did for `test`). In it we'll add a `LoginPage.js` file. When we're done our directory structure should look like this.

```text
├── package.json
├── pages
│   └── LoginPage.js
└── test
    └── LoginTest.js
└── vendor
    └── geckodriver
```

And here's the code that goes with it.

```javascript
//filename: pages/LoginPage.js
'use strict';
var sleep = require('sleep');

var driver;
var USERNAME_INPUT = {id: 'username'};
var PASSWORD_INPUT = {id: 'password'};
var SUBMIT_BUTTON = {css: 'button'};
var SUCCESS_MESSAGE = {css: '.flash.success'};

function LoginPage(driver) {
  this.driver = driver;
  this.driver.get('http://the-internet.herokuapp.com/login');
}

LoginPage.prototype.with = function(username, password) {
  this.driver.findElement(USERNAME_INPUT).sendKeys(username);
  this.driver.findElement(PASSWORD_INPUT).sendKeys(password);
  this.driver.findElement(SUBMIT_BUTTON).click().then(function() {
    sleep.sleep(1);
  });
};

LoginPage.prototype.successMessagePresent = function() {
  return this.driver.findElement(SUCCESS_MESSAGE).isDisplayed();
};

module.exports = LoginPage;
```

At the top of the file we specify `'use strict';` and some variables. One is for our instance of Selenium and the rest are for the locators we want to use on the page. We then declare the class by specifying its constructor (e.g., `function LoginPage(driver) {`). It will run whenever a new instance of this class is created. In order for this class to work we need access to the Selenium driver object, so we accept it as a parameter and store it in the `this.driver` class variable (so other methods in the class can access it). Then the login page is visited (with `driver.get()`).

The second method (e.g., `LoginPage.prototype.with = function(username, password) {`) is the core functionality of the login page. It's responsible for filling in the login form and submitting it. By accepting parameters for the username and password we're able to make the functionality here reusable for additional tests. Instead of the hard-coded locators, we updated the Selenium calls with the locator variables we specified near the top of the class.

The last method (e.g., `LoginPage.prototype.successMessagePresent`) is the display check from earlier that was used in our assertion. It will return a promise and ultimately a boolean result just like before. And the class ends with `module.exports = LoginPage;`. This makes it so the class gets returned as an object when it is required in our test.

Now let's update our test to use this page object.

```javascript
// filename: test/LoginTest.js
'use strict';
var webdriver = require('selenium-webdriver');
var test = require('selenium-webdriver/testing');
var assert = require('assert');
var LoginPage = require('../pages/LoginPage');

test.describe('Login', function() {
  this.timeout(30000);
  var driver;
  var login;

  test.beforeEach(function() {
    var vendorDirectory = process.cwd() + '/vendor';
    process.env.PATH = vendorDirectory + ":$PATH";
    driver = new webdriver.Builder().forBrowser('firefox').build();
    login = new LoginPage(driver);
  });

  test.afterEach(function() {
    driver.quit();
  });

  test.it('with valid credentials', function() {
    login.with('tomsmith', 'SuperSecretPassword!');
    login.successMessagePresent().then(function(elementDisplayed) {
      assert.equal(elementDisplayed, true, 'Success message not displayed');
    });
  });

});
```

Before we can use the page object we first need to require it (e.g., `var LoginPage = require('../pages/LoginPage');`). Then it's a simple matter of updating our test setup to return an instance of the login page and updating the test method with the new page object actions.

Now the test is more concise and readable. And when you save everything and run it (e.g., `mocha` from the command-line), it will run and pass just like before.

### Part 2: Write Another Test

Creating a page object may feel like more work than what we started with initially. But it's well worth the effort since we're in a much sturdier position and able to easily write follow-on tests (since the specifics of the page are abstracted away for simple reuse).

Let's add another test for a failed login to demonstrate.

First, let's take a look at the markup that gets rendered when we provide invalid credentials:

```html
<div id="flash-messages" class="large-12 columns">
  <div data-alert="" id="flash" class="flash error">
    Your username is invalid!
    <a href="#" class="close">x</a>
  </div>
</div>
```

Here is the element we'll want to use in our assertion.

```html
class="flash error"
```

Let's add a locator for this element to our page object along with a new method to perform a display check against it.

```javascript
// filename: pages/LoginPage.js
// ...
var SUCCESS_MESSAGE = {css: '.flash.success'};
var FAILURE_MESSAGE = {css: '.flash.error'};
// ...
LoginPage.prototype.failureMessagePresent = function() {
  return this.driver.findElement(FAILURE_MESSAGE).isDisplayed();
};

module.exports = LoginPage;
```

Now we're ready to add a test for failed login to our `test/LoginTest.js` file.

```javascript
// filename: test/LoginTest.js
// ...
  test.it('with invalid credentials', function() {
    login.with('tomsmith', 'bad password');
    login.failureMessagePresent().then(function(elementDisplayed) {
      assert.equal(elementDisplayed, true, 'Failure message not displayed');
    });
  });

```

If we save these changes and run our tests (e.g., `mocha` from the command-line) we will see two browser windows open (one after the other) testing for successful and failure login scenarios.

## Why Asserting False Won't Work (yet)

You may be wondering why we didn't just check to see if the success message wasn't present in our assertion.

```javascript
    login.successMessagePresent().then(function(elementDisplayed) {
      assert.equal(elementDisplayed, false, "Success message displayed");
    });
```

There are two problems with this approach. First, our test will fail. This is because Selenium errors when it looks for an element that's not present on the page -- which looks like this:

```sh
NoSuchElementError: Unable to locate element: {"method":"css selector","selector":".flash.success"}
```

But don't worry, we'll address this in the next chapter.

Second, the absence of a success message doesn't necessarily indicate a failed login. The assertion we ended up with originally is more effective.

## Part 3: Confirm We're In The Right Place

Before we can call our page object finished, there's one more addition we should make. We'll want to add an assertion to make sure that Selenium is in the right place before proceeding. This will help add some resiliency to our test.

As a rule, you want to keep assertions in your tests and out of your page objects. But this is an exception to the rule.

```javascript
// filename: pages/LoginPage.js
'use strict';
var assert = require('assert');

var driver;
var LOGIN_FORM = {id: 'login'};
var USERNAME_INPUT = {id: 'username'};
var PASSWORD_INPUT = {id: 'password'};
var SUBMIT_BUTTON = {css: 'button'};
var SUCCESS_MESSAGE = {css: '.flash.success'};
var FAILURE_MESSAGE = {css: '.flash.error'};

function LoginPage(driver) {
  this.driver = driver;
  this.driver.get('http://the-internet.herokuapp.com/login');
  this.driver.findElement(LOGIN_FORM).isDisplayed().then(function(elementDisplayed) {
    assert.equal(elementDisplayed, true, 'Login form not loaded');
  });
}
// ...
```

After requiring the assertion library and adding a new locator to the page object for the login form we add an assertion to the constructor, just after Selenium visits the login page. This will check that the login form is displayed. If it is the tests using this page object will proceed. If not the test will fail and provide an output message stating that the login form wasn't loaded.

Now when we save everything and run our tests they will run just like before. But now we can feel confident that the tests will only proceed if login page is in a ready state.

## Outro

With Page Objects you'll be able to easily maintain and extend your tests. But how you write your Page Objects may vary depending on your preference and experience. The example demonstrated above is a simple approach. It's worth taking a look at the Selenium project wiki page for Page Objects [here](https://github.com/SeleniumHQ/selenium/wiki/PageObjects) (even if its examples are only written in Java). There's also Martin Fowler's seminal blog post on the topic as well ([link](http://martinfowler.com/bliki/PageObject.html)).
