# Running Browsers In The Cloud

If you've ever needed to test features in an older browser like Internet Explorer 8 or 9 then odds are you ran a virtual machine (VM) on your computer with a "legit" version of Windows.

Handy, but what happens when you need to check things on multiple versions of IE? Now you're looking at multiple VMs. And what about when you need cover other browser and Operating System (OS) combinations? Now you're looking at provisioning, running, and maintaining your own set of machines and standing up something like Selenium Grid to coordinate tests across them.

Rather than take on the overhead of a test infrastructure you can easily outsource this to a third-party cloud provider like [Sauce Labs](https://saucelabs.com/).

## A Selenium Remote, Selenium Grid, And Sauce Labs Primer

At the heart of Selenium at scale is the use of Selenium Grid and Selenium Remote.

Selenium Grid lets you distribute test execution across several machines and you connect to it with Selenium Remote. You tell the Grid which browser and OS you want your test to run on through the use of Selenium Remote's `DesiredCapabilities`.

Under the hood this is how Sauce Labs works. They are ultimately running Selenium Grid behind the scenes, and they receive and execute tests through Selenium Remote and the `DesiredCapabilities` you set.

Let's dig in with an example.

## An Example

### Part 1: Initial Setup

__NOTE: You'll need an account to use Sauce Labs. Their [free trial](https://saucelabs.com/signup/trial) offers enough to get you started. And if you're signing up because you want to test an open source project, then be sure to check out their [Open Sauce account](https://saucelabs.com/open-source).__

With Sauce Labs we need to provide specifics about what we want in our test environment, our credentials, and configure Selenium a little bit differently. Let's start by updating our `config.js` file to store these details.

```javascript
// filename: lib/config.js
module.exports = {
  baseUrl: process.env.BASE_URL || 'http://the-internet.herokuapp.com',
  host: process.env.HOST || 'saucelabs',
  browser: process.env.BROWSER || 'internet explorer',
  browserVersion: process.env.BROWSER_VERSION || '11.0',
  platform: process.env.PLATFORM || 'Windows 7',
  sauceUsername: process.env.SAUCE_USERNAME,
  sauceAccessKey: process.env.SAUCE_ACCESS_KEY
};
```

In addition to the `baseUrl` and `browser` variables, we've added some more (e.g., `host`, `browserVersion`, `platform`, `sauceUsername`, and `sauceAccessKey`).

`host` enables us to specify whether our tests run locally or on Sauce Labs.

With `browser`, `browserveresion`, and `platform` we can specify which browser and operating system combination we want our tests to run on. You can see a full list of Sauce's available platform options [here](https://saucelabs.com/platforms/). They also have a handy configuration generator (which will tell you what values to plug into your test suite at run-time) [here](https://docs.saucelabs.com/reference/platforms-configurator/).

Now we can update the `build` method in our Driver Factory to work with Selenium Remote.

```javascript
// filename: lib/DriverFactory.js
// ...
DriverFactory.prototype.build = function() {
  var builder;
  if (config.host === 'saucelabs') {
    var url = 'http://ondemand.saucelabs.com:80/wd/hub';
    builder = new webdriver.Builder().usingServer(url);
    builder.withCapabilities({
      browserName: config.browser,
      'version': config.browserVersion,
      platform: config.platform,
      username: config.sauceUsername,
      accessKey: config.sauceAccessKey
    });
  } else if (config.host === 'localhost') {
    var vendorDirectory = process.cwd() + '/vendor';
    process.env.PATH = vendorDirectory + ":$PATH";
    builder = new webdriver.Builder().forBrowser(config.browser);
  }
  this.driver = builder.build();
};
// ...
```

We wrap everything in another condition to check `config.host`. If it's set to `'saucelabs'` then we specify the `url` for their on-demand end-point, create a new `webdriver` object that points to their end-point, and pass in the capabilities that we want and need (e.g., `config.browser`, `config.browserVersion`, `config.platform`, `config.sauceUsername`, and `config.sauceAccessKey`). Otherwise, if `config.host` is set to `'localhost'` then we handle browser execution just like before (adding the path to the vendor directory to the system path and launching a browser locally).

One additional thing we're doing is grabbing and storing the session ID, which we'll use in a later section.

If we save everything and run our tests they will execute in Sauce Labs and on the account dashboard we'll see our tests running in Internet Explorer 11 on Windows 7. To run the tests on different browser and operating system combinations, then simply provide their values as command-line options (e.g., `BROWSER=name --BROWSER_VERSION=version --PLATFORM=os mocha`). For a full list of possible options be sure to check out [the Sauce Labs Platform Configurator](https://wiki.saucelabs.com/display/DOCS/Platform+Configurator#/).

### Part 2: Test Name

It's great that our tests are running on Sauce Labs. But we're not done yet because the test name in each Sauce job is getting set to `unnamed job`. This makes it extremely challenging to know what test was run in the job. To remedy this we'll need to pass the test name to Sauce Labs somehow.

Given the order of operations of our test code, we only have access to the test name after the test has completed. So we'll account for this in both the `quit` method of our Driver Factory and the global `afterEach` in our Base Test. Let's start with the Driver Factory first.

```javascript
// filename: lib/DriverFactory.js
DriverFactory.prototype.quit = function(testName) {
  if (config.host === 'saucelabs') {
    this.driver.executeScript('sauce:job-name=' + testName);
  }
  this.driver.quit();
};
```

With Selenium we have access to execute JavaScript directly in the browser session. When executing tests in Sauce Labs we have access to pass information to them about the current job through JavaScript calls. We take advantage of this fact by specifying the name of the job for the session. And we only want this to happen when our tests are executing in Sauce Labs, so we wrap this in a conditional check.

The test name (e.g., `testName`) gets passed in as an argument for this method. So let's hop over to our Base Test to update the `afterEach` method to pass in the test name.

```javascript
// filename: test/BaseTest.js
// ...
test.afterEach(function() {
  this.timeout(global.testTimeout);
  var testName = this.currentTest.fullTitle();
  driverFactory.quit(testName);
});
```

In Mocha we have access to the test name by virtue of `this.currentTest.fullTitle();`. This will give us both the test class name and the test method name as a string. Which we use to update our call to `driverFactory.quit` so the `testName` is passed in as an argument.

Now when we run our tests in Sauce Labs, [the account dashboard](https://saucelabs.com/account) will show the tests running with a correct name.

### Part 3: Test Status

There's still one more thing we'll need to handle, and that's setting the status of the Sauce Labs job after it completes.

Right now regardless of the outcome of a test, the job in Sauce Labs will register as `Finished`. Ideally we want to know if the job was a `Pass` or a `Fail`. That way we can tell at a glance if a test failed or not. And with a couple of tweaks we can make this happen easily enough.

First we need to update our `build`  method in the Driver Factory to grab the session ID from Selenium.

```javascript
// filename: lib/DriverFactory.js
'use strict';
var webdriver = require('selenium-webdriver');
var config = require('./config');
var driver,
    sessionId;
// ...
DriverFactory.prototype.build = function() {
// ...
  this.driver = builder.build();
  this.driver.getSession().then(function(sessionid){
      sessionId = sessionid.id_;
  });
};
```

Next, we need to update the `quit` method in the Driver Factory.

```javascript
// filename: lib/DriverFactory.js
// ...
DriverFactory.prototype.quit = function(testName, testResult) {
  if (config.host === 'saucelabs') {
    this.driver.executeScript('sauce:job-name=' + testName);
    this.driver.executeScript('sauce:job-result=' + testResult);
  }
  this.driver.quit().then(function() {
    if (config.host === 'saucelabs' && testResult === false) {
      console.log('https://saucelabs.com/beta/tests/' + sessionId);
    }
  });
};
```

With the JavaScript executor we're able to pass in the test result, which we're getting as a second parameter on this method. And for good measure we've also put the `testResult` to good use by outputting a URL of the Sauce Labs job to the console if there is a test failure. That way we'll have easy access to the direct URL of the job to review what happened in the test.

Now let's update the `afterEach` in our Base Test.

```javascript
// filename: test/BaseTest.js
test.afterEach(function() {
  this.timeout(global.testTimeout);
  var testName = this.currentTest.fullTitle(),
      testResult = (this.currentTest.state === 'passed') ? true : false;
  driverFactory.quit(testName, testResult);
});
```

We grab the state of the current test (e.g., `this.currentTest.state`) and check to see if it passed (e.g., `=== 'passed'`). Depending on the result we store an appropriate boolean (e.g., `true` or `false`) in `testResult` and pass it into `driverFactory.quit`.

Now when we run our tests in Sauce Labs and navigate to [the Sauce Labs Account dashboard](https://saucelabs.com/account), we will see our tests running like before. But now there will be a proper test status when they finish (e.g., `Pass` or `Fail`) and we'll see the URL for the job in the console output as well. This enables us to easily jump to the specific job in Sauce Labs.

### Part 4: Sauce Connect

There are various ways that companies make their pre-production application available for testing. Some use an obscure public URL and protect it with some form of authentication (e.g., Basic Auth, or certificate based authentication). Others keep it behind their firewall. For those that stay behind a firewall, Sauce Labs has you covered.

They have a program called [Sauce Connect](https://wiki.saucelabs.com/display/DOCS/Setting+Up+Sauce+Connect) that creates a secure tunnel between your machine and their private cloud. With it you can run tests in Sauce Labs and test applications that are only available on your private network.

To use Sauce Connect you need to download and run it. There's a copy for each operating system -- get yours [here](https://docs.saucelabs.com/reference/sauce-connect/#basic-setup) and run it from the command-line. In the context of our existing test code let's download Sauce Connect, unzip it's contents, and store it in our `vendor` directory.

```text
├── lib
│   ├── DriverFactory.js
│   └── config.js
├── package.json
├── pages
│   ├── BasePage.js
│   ├── DynamicLoadingPage.js
│   └── LoginPage.js
├── test
│   ├── BaseTest.js
│   ├── DynamicLoadingTest.js
│   └── LoginTest.js
└── vendor
    ├── chromedriver
    └── geckodriver
    └── sc-4.3.16-osx
        ├── bin
        │   ├── sc
        │   └── sc.dSYM
        │       └── Contents
        │           ├── Info.plist
        │           └── Resources
        │               └── DWARF
        │                   └── sc
        ├── include
        │   └── sauceconnect.h
        ├── lib
        │   ├── libsauceconnect.a
        │   └── libsauceconnect.la
        └── license.html
```

Now we just need to launch the application while specifying our Sauce account credentials.

```sh
vendor/sc-4.3.16-osx/bin/sc -u $SAUCE_USERNAME -k $SAUCE_ACCESS_KEY
Sauce Connect 4.3.16, build 2399 c7e5fec
*** WARNING: open file limit 7168 is too low!
*** Sauce Labs recommends setting it to at least 8000.
Starting up; pid 58426
Command line arguments: vendor/sc-4.3.16-osx/bin/sc -u the-internet -k ****
Log file: /tmp/sc.log
Pid file: /tmp/sc_client.pid
Timezone: EDT GMT offset: -4h
Using no proxy for connecting to Sauce Labs REST API.
Resolving saucelabs.com to 162.222.75.243 took 68 ms.
Started scproxy on port 49310.
Please wait for 'you may start your tests' to start your tests.
Starting secure remote tunnel VM...
Secure remote tunnel VM provisioned.
Tunnel ID: 21ff9664b06c4edaa4bd573cdc1fbac1
Secure remote tunnel VM is now: booting
Secure remote tunnel VM is now: running
Using no proxy for connecting to tunnel VM.
Resolving tunnel hostname to 162.222.76.147 took 55ms.
Starting Selenium listener...
Establishing secure TLS connection to tunnel...
Selenium listener started on port 4445.
Sauce Connect is up, you may start your tests.
```

Now that the tunnel is established, we could run our tests against a local instance of our application (e.g., [the-internet](https://github.com/tourdedave/the-internet)). Assuming the application was set up and running on our local machine, we run our tests against it by specifying a different base URL at runtime (e.g., `BASE_URL=http://localhost:4567 mocha`) and they would work.

To see the status of the tunnel, we can view it on [the tunnel page of the account dashboard](https://saucelabs.com/beta/tunnels). To shut the tunnel down, we can do it manually from this page. Or we can issue a `Ctrl+C` command to the terminal window where it's running.

When the tunnel is closing, here's what you'll see.

```sh
Got signal 2
Cleaning up.
Removing tunnel 21ff9664b06c4edaa4bd573cdc1fbac1.
All jobs using tunnel have finished.
Waiting for the connection to terminate...
Connection closed (8).
Goodbye.
```

