# Anatomy Of A Good Acceptance Test

In order to write automated web tests that are easy to maintain, perform well, and are ultimately resilient there are some simple guidelines to follow:

+ Write atomic and autonomous tests
+ Group like tests together in small batches
+ Be descriptive
+ Use a Test Runner
+ Store tests in a Version Control System

## Atomic & Autonomous Tests

Each test needs to be concise (e.g., testing a single feature rather than multiple features) and be capable of being run independently (e.g., sets up its own data rather than relying on a previous test to do it). Doing this may require a mental shift, discipline, and more up front effort. But it will make a dramatic impact on the quality, effectiveness, and maintainability of your tests. Especially when you get into parallel test execution.

## Grouping Tests

As your test suite grows you will have numerous test files. Each one containing a grouping of tests that exercise similar functionality. These test files should be grouped together in a simple directory structure as the groupings become obvious. If you want to create a test run of disparate tests, this is something that is easy to handle when using a Test Runner (covered briefly below, and in-depth in Chapter 16).

## Being Descriptive

A test file should have a high level name that denotes what the tests within it are exercising. Each test should have an informative name (even if it is a bit verbose). Also, each test (or grouping of tests) should include some helpful metadata (e.g., tags, or categories) which can provide additional information about the test as well as enable flexible test execution (more on that in Chapter 16). This way all or part of your test suite can be run, and the results will be informative thanks to helpful naming.

This enables developers to run a subset of tests to exercise functionality they just modified while also enabling you to intelligently wire your test suite up to a Continuous Integration (CI) server for fast and dynamic feedback (more on CI servers in Chapter 17).

## Test Runners

At the heart of every test harness is some kind of a test runner that does a lot of the heavy lifting (e.g., test execution, centralized configuration, test output, etc.). Rather than reinvent the wheel you can use one of the many test runners that exist today. With it you can bolt on third party libraries to extend its functionality if there's something missing.

## Version Control

In order to effectively collaborate with other testers and developers on your team, your test code must live in a version control system. Look to see what your development team uses and add your code to it. Otherwise, set up one of the following:

+ [Git](http://git-scm.com/)
+ [Mercurial](https://www.mercurial-scm.org/)
+ [Subversion](http://subversion.apache.org/)

Keep in mind that your test code can live in a __separate__ repository from the code of the application you're testing. Combining them may be advantageous but if all you're doing is writing and running tests against web endpoints (which is a majority of what your Selenium tests will be doing) then leaving your test code in a separate repository is a fine way to go.


