# Writing Your First Test

Fundamentally, Selenium works with two pieces of information, the element on a page you want to use and what you want to do with it. This one-two punch will be repeated over and over until you achieve the outcome you want in your application. At which point you will perform an assertion to confirm that the result is what you intended.

Let's take logging in to a website as an example. With Selenium you would:

1. Visit the page with the login form
2. Find the login form's username field and input text
3. Find the login form's password field and input text
4. Find the login form submit button and click it

Selenium is able to find and interact with elements on a page by way of various "locator strategies". The list includes `Class`, `CSS`, `ID`, `Link Text`, `Name`, `Partial Link Text`, `Tag Name`, and `XPath`.

While each serves a purpose, you only need to know a few to start writing effective tests.

## How To Find Locators

The simplest way to find locators is to inspect the elements on a page. The best way to do this is from within your web browser. Fortunately, modern web browsers come pre-loaded with development tools that make this simple to accomplish.

When viewing the page, __right-click__ on the element you want to interact with and __click Inspect Element__. This will bring up a small window with all of the HTML for the page but zoomed into your highlighted selection. From here you can see if there are unique or descriptive attributes you can work with.

## How To Find Quality Elements

Your focus with picking an effective element should be on finding something that is __unique__, __descriptive__, and __unlikely to change__. Ripe candidates for this are `id` and `class` attributes. Whereas copy (e.g., text, or the text of a link) is less ideal since it is more apt to change. This may not hold true for when you make assertions, but it's a good goal to strive for.

If the elements you are attempting to work with don't have unique `id` or `class` attributes directly on them, look at the element that houses them (a.k.a. the parent element). Oftentimes the parent element has a unique locator that you can use to start with and drill down into the element you want to use.

And if you can't find any unique elements, have a conversation with your development team letting them know what you are trying to accomplish. It's not hard for them to add helpful, semantic markup to make test automation easier. Especially when they know the use case you are trying to automate. The alternative can be a lengthy, painful process which will probably yield working test code, but it will be brittle and hard to maintain.

## An Example

### Part 1: Find The Elements And Write The Test

Here's the markup for a standard login form (pulled from [the login example on the-internet](http://the-internet.herokuapp.com/login)).

```html
<form name="login" id="login" action="/authenticate" method="post">
   <div class="row">
    <div class="large-6 small-12 columns">
      <label for="username">Username</label>
      <input type="text" name="username" id="username">
    </div>
  </div>
  <div class="row">
    <div class="large-6 small-12 columns">
      <label for="password">Password</label>
      <input type="password" name="password" id="password">
    </div>
  </div>
    <button class="radius" type="submit"><i class="icon-2x icon-signin"> Login</i></button>
</form>
```

Notice the unique elements on the form. The username input field has a unique `id` (e.g., `<input type="text" name="username" id="username">`), as does the password input field (e.g., `<input type="password" name="password" id="password">`). The submit button doesn't have an `id`, but it's the only button on the page.

Let's put these elements to use in our first test (or 'spec' as it's called in RSpec). First, let's make sure we have the correct versions of `rspec` and `selenium-webdriver` installed.

```ruby
# filename: Gemfile
source 'https://rubygems.org'

gem 'rspec', '~>3.8.0'
gem 'selenium-webdriver', '~>4.0.0.alpha.2'
```

After updating our Gemfile we can install the specified libraries with `bundle install` in the command-prompt.

Now let's create a folder for our tests called `spec` a new file called `login_spec.rb` in it. We'll also need to create a `vendor` directory for third-party files and download [`geckodriver`](https://github.com/mozilla/geckodriver) into it. Grab the latest release for your operating system from [here](https://github.com/mozilla/geckodriver/releases/latest) and unpack its contents into the `vendor` directory. This is a required file (known as a browser driver) in order to make Selenium work with Firefox. See [Chapter 12](#chapter12) for more detail about browser drivers.

When we're done our directory structure should look like this.

```text
├── Gemfile
├── spec
│   └── login_spec.rb
└── vendor
    └── geckodriver
```

Here is the code we will add to the test file for our Selenium commands, locators, etc.

```ruby
# filename: spec/login_spec.rb

require 'selenium-webdriver'

describe 'Login' do

  before(:each) do
    driver_path = File.join(Dir.pwd, 'vendor', 'geckodriver')
    if File.file? driver_path
      service = Selenium::WebDriver::Service.firefox(path: driver_path)
      @driver = Selenium::WebDriver.for :firefox, service: service
    else
      @driver = Selenium::WebDriver.for :firefox
    end
  end

  after(:each) do
    @driver.quit
  end

  it 'succeeded' do
    @driver.get 'http://the-internet.herokuapp.com/login'
    @driver.find_element(id: 'username').send_keys('tomsmith')
    @driver.find_element(id: 'password').send_keys('SuperSecretPassword!')
    @driver.find_element(css: 'button').submit
  end

end
```

At the top of the file we are pulling in `selenium-webdriver` which is the official open-source library for Selenium. It gives us the bindings necessary to drive the browser. Next is the `describe`, which is the title of this test suite (or test class). A simple and helpful name is chosen to note the suite's intent (e.g., 'Login'). An opening `do` and a closing `end` (placed at the end of the file) are required to start and finish the suite.

In order to use Selenium we need to create an instance of it. This is done with the command `Selenium::WebDriver.for :firefox`, which is made available to us through the `selenium-webdriver` library we `require` at the top of the file. In order for this to work we need to provide the path to the `geckodriver` file, which we do by finding and storing it in a local variable called `geckodriver` and passing it in as part of our Selenium instantiation with a service object (e.g., `Selenium::WebDriver.for :firefox, service: service`). Alternatively, you could have `geckodriver` listed on your system path. If that's the case, then we also want to respect that option, so we check to see if `geckodriver` is a file in the `vendor` directory. If not, then the standard instantiation for Firefox is used (without specifying a service object).

After our test we don't want the browser we opened to stick around, so we close it. This is what we're doing in `before(:each)` and `after(:each)`. Notice that we are storing our instance of Selenium in an instance variable (`@driver`) so we can access it throughout our entire test suite.

Last up is the `it` block, which is the test. Similar to `describe` we can give it a simple and helpful name (e.g., 'succeeded'). In the test we are using the locators we identified from the markup by finding them with `@driver.find_element`, passing in the locator type as a symbol (e.g., `id:`) and the locator value as a string (e.g., `username`, `password`, etc.). Once found, we take an action against each of them, which in this case is inputting text (with `.send_keys`) and click the submit button (with `.click`).

If we run this (e.g., `rspec` from the command-line), it will run and pass. But there's one thing missing -- an assertion. Without it, there's no way to tell if the end state of our page is correct. We need to see what the page looks like after logging in, look through the markup, and find an element to use in our assertion.

### Part 2: Figure Out What To Assert

Here is the markup that renders on the page after submitting the login form:

```html
<div class="row">
  <div id="flash-messages" class="large-12 columns">
    <div data-alert="" id="flash" class="flash success">
      You logged into a secure area!
      <a href="#" class="close">x</a>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div id="content" class="large-12 columns">
  <div class="example">
    <h2><i class="icon-lock"></i> Secure Area</h2>
    <h4 class="subheader">Welcome to the Secure Area. When you are done click logout below.</h4>
    <a class="button secondary radius" href="/logout"><i class="icon-2x icon-signout"> Logout</i></a>
  </div>
</div>
```

After logging in, there looks to be a couple of things we can use for our assertion. There's the flash message class (most appealing), the logout button (appealing), or the copy from the h2 or the flash message (least appealing). Since the flash message class name is descriptive, denotes success, and is less likely to change than the copy, let's go with that.

But whenever we try to access a class element with two words in it (e.g., `class="flash success"`) we will need to combine them together into a single locator string that is written in either a CSS selector or XPath. Either approach works well, but the examples throughout this book will focus on how to use CSS selectors (when not using ID or Class locators).

## A Quick Primer on CSS Selectors

In web design, CSS (Cascading Style Sheets) are used to apply styles to the markup (HTML) on a page. CSS is able to do this by declaring which bits of the markup it wants to interact with through the use of selectors. Selenium operates in a similar manner but instead of changing the style of elements, it interacts with them by clicking, getting values, typing, etc.

CSS selectors are a pretty straightforward and handy way to write locators, especially for hard to reach elements.

For right now, here's what you need to know. In CSS, class names start with a dot (`.`). For classes with multiple words, put a dot in front of __each__ word, and remove the spaces (e.g., `.flash.success` for `class='flash success'`).

For a good resource on CSS Selectors, I encourage you to check out [Sauce Labs' write up on them](https://saucelabs.com/resources/articles/selenium-tips-css-selectors).

### Part 3: Write The Assertion And Verify It

```ruby
# filename: spec/login_spec.rb
# ...
  it 'succeeded' do
    @driver.get 'http://the-internet.herokuapp.com/login'
    @driver.find_element(id: 'username').send_keys('username')
    @driver.find_element(id: 'password').send_keys('password')
    @driver.find_element(css: 'button').click
    expect(@driver.find_element(css: '.flash.success').displayed?).to be_truthy
  end

end
```

Now our test has an assertion! But there's a lot going on in that one line, let's step through it to make sure we understand what it's doing.

First, we are finding the element we want to make an assertion against (using the locator type `css` and the locator string `.flash.success`). After that, we are asking Selenium if this element is displayed on the page (with `.displayed?`). This returns a boolean response that we can make an assertion against. To make the assertion we leverage an RSpec assertion method (`expect`) and an RSpec matcher (`to`) followed by the expected result `be_truthy`.

After logging in if the success flash message is displayed then Selenium will return `true` and the test will pass.

### Just To Make Sure

Now when we run this test (`rspec login_spec.rb` from the command-line) it will pass just like before, but now there is an assertion which should catch a failure if something is amiss.

Just to make certain that this test is doing what we think it should, let's change the assertion to __force a failure__ and run it again. A simple fudging of the locator will suffice.

```ruby
expect(@driver.find_element(css: '.flash.successasdf').displayed?).to be_truthy
```

If it fails, then we can feel confident that it's doing what we expect, and can change the assertion back to normal before committing our code. This trick will save you more trouble that you know. Practice it often.


