# Writing Really Re-usable Test Code

In the previous chapter we stepped through creating a simple page object to capture the behavior of the page we were interacting with. While this was a good start, there's more we can do.

As our test suite grows and we add more page objects we will start to see common behavior that we will want to use over and over again throughout our suite. If we leave this unchecked we will end up with duplicative code which will slowly make our page objects harder to maintain. 

Right now we are using Selenium actions directly in our page object. While on the face of it this may seem fine, it has some long term impacts, like:

+ slower page object creation due to the lack of a simple Domain Specific Language (DSL)
+ test maintenance issues if the Selenium API changes
+ the inability to swap out the driver for your tests (e.g., mobile, REST, etc.)

With a facade layer we can easily side step these concerns by abstracting our common actions into a central place and leveraging it in our page objects.

## An Example

Let's step through an example with our login page object.

### Part 1: Create The Base Page Object

First we will need to create the base page object, which we'll put in the `pages` directory.

```sh
├── Gemfile
├── pages
│   ├── base_page.rb
│   └── login.rb
├── spec
│   └── login_spec.rb
└── vendor
    └── geckodriver
```

Next we'll create a class and populate it with methods for each of the Selenium commands we've been using.

```ruby
# filename: pages/base_page.rb
require 'selenium-webdriver'

class BasePage

  def initialize(driver)
    @driver = driver
  end

  def visit(url)
    @driver.get url
  end

  def find(locator)
    @driver.find_element locator
  end

  def type(text, locator)
    find(locator).send_keys text
  end

  def click(locator)
    find(locator).click
  end

  def is_displayed?(locator)
    find(locator).displayed?
  end

end
```

First we pull in the Selenium Ruby bindings (`require selenium-webdriver`). By placing it here in this file we will no longer need to require it anywhere else in our test suite (assuming all of our tests leverage page objects). And it makes sense to have it live here since this is the only file where we will be referencing Selenium commands directly.

Next we declare our class and name it appropriately with camel-casing (`class BasePage`).

In our `initialize` method we are accepting a driver object as an argument and setting it as an instance variable to make it available throughout this class. We then add common methods that we will reference in our page objects (e.g., `visit`, `find`, `type`, `submit`, and `is_displayed?`).

Now let's update our login page object to leverage this.

```ruby
# filename: pages/login.rb
require_relative 'base_page'

class Login < BasePage

  LOGIN_FORM      = { id: 'login' }
  USERNAME_INPUT  = { id: 'username' }
  PASSWORD_INPUT  = { id: 'password' }
  SUBMIT_BUTTON   = { css: 'button'  }
  SUCCESS_MESSAGE = { css: '.flash.success' }
  FAILURE_MESSAGE = { css: '.flash.error' }

  def initialize(driver)
    super
    visit 'http://the-internet.herokuapp.com/login'
    raise 'Login page not ready' unless
      is_displayed?(LOGIN_FORM)
  end

  def with(username, password)
    type username, USERNAME_INPUT
    type password, PASSWORD_INPUT
    click SUBMIT_BUTTON
  end

  def success_message_present?
    is_displayed? SUCCESS_MESSAGE
  end

  def failure_message_present?
    is_displayed? FAILURE_MESSAGE
  end

end

```

In order to use the base page object we need to do two things. First we need to include the file, which is handled using `require_relative`. And second, we need to connect the login page object with the base page object with inheritance (which is handled in the class declaration with the `<` operator). This is effectively saying `Login` is a child of `BasePage`. Or, `BasePage` is the parent of `Login`. This enables us to freely reference the methods we created in the base page object.

As a result of this refactoring, our `initialize` method changes a bit. Rather than setting the driver object as an instance variable, we are calling `super`. This is a built-in keyword in Ruby for class inheritance. It triggers a method of the same name to be run from the parent class. So in this case, `initialize` from `BasePage` gets run, which is responsible for handling the driver object retrieval and instance variable creation.

Since the `BasePage` is now the only place where we reference Selenium actions directly, it stands that it should be the only place where we need to reference a `@driver` object. So we replace all of the driver incantations in this class with calls to the methods we created in the base page object. Our tests remain unchanged, but our page objects are now more flexible and readable.

Running our tests (`rspec` from the command-line) will still yield a passing result.

### Part 2: Add Some Error Handling

Remember in the previous chapter when we ran into an error with Selenium when we looked for an element that wasn't on the page? Let's address that now.

To recap -- here's the error message we saw:

```sh
.F

Failures:

  1) Login failed
     Failure/Error: expect(@login.success_message_present?).to eql false

     Selenium::WebDriver::Error::NoSuchElementError:
       Unable to locate element: {"method":"css selector","selector":".flash.success"}
     # ...
     # ./login.rb:21:in `success_message_present?'
     # ./login_spec.rb:23:in `block (2 levels) in <top (required)>'

Finished in 8.85 seconds (files took 0.18961 seconds to load)
2 examples, 1 failure

Failed examples:

rspec ./login_spec.rb:20 # Login failed
```

The important thing to note is the specific error message Selenium offered up. The part that comes just before the line that says 'Unable to locate element'. We're interested in `Selenium::WebDriver::Error::NoSuchElementError`. With it we can make our code catch it and return a `false` boolean instead of failing the test.

Let's update the `is_displayed?` method in our base page object to do just that.

```ruby
# filename: pages/base_page.rb
#...

def is_displayed?(locator)
  begin
    find(locator).displayed?
  rescue Selenium::WebDriver::Error::NoSuchElementError
    false
  end

end
```

In Ruby we can make our code more resilient by wrapping an action in a `begin`/`rescue` block. In this case we're wrapping our attempt to see if an element is displayed to the user. If the element is not on the page Selenium will raise a `NoSuchElementError` exception. When that happens, our code will now `rescue` for that specific error condition, and return `false` instead of failing the test.

Now we can write a test to see if an element is _not_ on the page without fear of our test blowing up.

Just to verify, let's revisit our failed login test and update it to assert that the success message _isn't_ present.

```ruby
# filename: spec/login_spec.rb
#...
  it 'failed' do
    @login.with('asdf', 'asdf')
    #expect(@login.failure_message_present?).to be_truthy
    expect(@login.success_message_present?).to be_falsey
  end

end
```

Now when we run this (`rspec` from the command-line) it will run without error, and pass. Feel free to change the assertion back when you're done.


