# Running Browsers In The Cloud

If you've ever needed to test features in an older browser like Internet Explorer 8 then odds are you ran a virtual machine (VM) on your computer with a "legit" version of Windows XP.

Handy, but what happens when you need to check things on multiple versions of IE? Now you're looking at multiple VMs. And what about when you need to scale and cover other browser and Operating System (OS) combinations? Now you're looking at provisioning, running, and maintaining your own farm of machines and standing up something like Selenium Grid to coordinate tests across them.

And all you wanted to do was run your tests on the browsers you cared about...

Rather than take on the overhead of a test infrastructure you can easily outsource things to a third-party cloud provider. There are a handful of players in this space, but there's one that stands out -- Sauce Labs.

## A Selenium Remote, Selenium Grid, And Sauce Labs Primer

At the heart of Selenium at scale is the use of Selenium Grid and Selenium Remote. Selenium Grid lets you distribute test execution across several machines and you connect to it with Selenium Remote. With Selenium Remote you specify the browser type, browser version, and operating system through the use of Selenium Remote's `Capabilities`.

This is fundamentally how Sauce Labs works. Behind the curtain they are ultimately running Selenium Grid, and they receive and execute your tests through Selenium Remote.

Let's dig in with an example.

## An Example

### Part 1: Initial Setup

__NOTE: You'll need an account to use Sauce Labs. Their [free trial](https://saucelabs.com/signup/trial) offers enough to get you started. And if you're signing up because you want to test an open source project, then be sure to check out their [Open Sauce account](https://saucelabs.com/open-source).__

With Sauce Labs we need to provide our credentials, specifics about what we want in our test environment, and configure Selenium a little bit differently than we have been. Let's start by creating a new config file for cloud execution.

```ruby
# filename: config_cloud.rb

ENV['base_url']         ||= 'http://the-internet.herokuapp.com'
ENV['host']             = 'saucelabs'
# ENV['SAUCE_USERNAME']   = 'your-sauce-username'
# ENV['SAUCE_ACCESS_KEY'] = 'your-sauce-access-key'
ENV['operating_system'] ||= 'Windows XP'
ENV['browser']          ||= 'internet_explorer'
ENV['browser_version']  ||= '8'

```

Notice the use of a host environment variable (e.g., `ENV['host'] = 'saucelabs'`). This is what we'll use in our `spec_helper` file to determine whether to run things locally or in the cloud. We can specify our Sauce Labs credentials here by hard-coding them, or we configure them on our system. And we'll use the `operating_system`, `browser`, and `browser_version` environment variables to populate the `Capabilities` object.

```ruby
# filename: spec/spec_helper.rb
require 'selenium-webdriver'

RSpec.configure do |config|

  config.before(:each) do |example|
    case ENV['host']
    when 'saucelabs'
      caps = Selenium::WebDriver::Remote::Capabilities.send(ENV['browser'])
      caps.version = ENV['browser_version']
      caps.platform = ENV['operating_system']
      caps[:name] = example.metadata[:full_description]

      @driver = Selenium::WebDriver.for(
        :remote,
        url: "http://#{ENV['SAUCE_USERNAME']}:#{ENV['SAUCE_ACCESS_KEY']}@ondemand.saucelabs.com:80/wd/hub",
        desired_capabilities: caps)
    else
      case ENV['browser']
      when 'firefox'
        geckodriver = File.join(Dir.pwd, 'vendor', 'geckodriver')
        @driver = Selenium::WebDriver.for :firefox, driver_path: geckodriver
      when 'chrome'
        chromedriver = File.join(Dir.pwd, 'vendor', 'chromedriver')
        @driver = Selenium::WebDriver.for :chrome, driver_path: chromedriver
      end
    end
  end

  config.after(:each) do
    @driver.quit
  end

end
```

We've taken our browser conditional and made it nested underneath one for the host environment variable. If the host is set to `'saucelabs'`, then we configure the capabilities for Selenium Remote, passing in the requisite information that we will need for our Sauce Labs session. Otherwise, our tests will run locally.

There are a few things in this example that may be worth elaborating on.

First, we are using something called metaprogramming (a.k.a. code that writes code) when we are calling `Selenium::WebDriver::Remote::Capabilities`. We are using the `.send` method to pass in the environment variable. The value of which, in this case, is the same name as the method to configure Selenium Remote to use Internet Explorer. So, we are in effect, specifying `Selenium::WebDriver::Remote::Capabilitites.internet_explorer`. And if we were to specify 'chrome' for `ENV['browser']`, then it would give us `Selenium::WebDriver::Remote::Capabilities.chrome`.

Second, for `caps[:name]` we are using a piece of functionality built into RSpec which gives us the name of each test as it is being run. This will make it so each individual job in Sauce Labs will have the name of the test that was run.

Third, for the `url:` line in our `@driver` instantiation, we are injecting our environment variable through the use of string interpolation. This is why we are using double-quoted strings. If they were single-quotes then we wouldn't be able to do it.

Now if we run our test suite (`rspec -r ./config_cloud.rb`) and navigate to [our Sauce Labs Account page](https://saucelabs.com/account) then we should see each of the tests running in their own job, with proper names, against Internet Explorer 8.

### Part 2: Test Status

The only thing missing now is the pass/fail status of the job. In our local terminal window everything should be coming up green. But in the Sauce Labs dashboard each of the test jobs will just say __Finished__. This will make our results less useful in the long run, so let's fix it.

Thanks to Sauce Labs' `sauce_whisk` gem it's simple to do.

```ruby
# filename: Gemfile

source 'https://rubygems.org'

gem 'rspec', '~> 3.5.0'
gem 'selenium-webdriver', '3.0.3'
gem 'sauce_whisk', '~> 0.0.21'
```

After we install it we will need to require it somewhere, and `config_cloud.rb` is the most logical place since we will only need it when running our tests in Sauce. So let's add it to the top of the file.

```ruby
# filename: config_cloud.rb

require 'sauce_whisk'
...
```

All that's left is to add an action to our `after(:each)` block in `spec_helper.rb` to use `sauce_whisk` to set the correct job status.

Before we issue `@driver.quit` we will want to grab the session ID from our `@driver` object (which is the job ID in Sauce Labs) and use it to set the status of the job based on the test result. Also, we'll want to make sure that it only executes when running tests against Sauce Labs, so we'll wrap it in a conditional check against the host environment variable.

```ruby
# filename: spec/spec_helper.rb
#...

  config.after(:each) do |example|
    if ENV['host'] == 'saucelabs'
      if example.exception.nil?
        SauceWhisk::Jobs.pass_job @driver.session_id
      else
        SauceWhisk::Jobs.fail_job @driver.session_id
      end
    end

    @driver.quit
  end

end
```

Now when we run our tests (`rspec -r ./config_cloud.rb`) and navigate to [our Sauce Labs Account page](https://saucelabs.com/account), we should see our tests running like before. But now when they finish there should be a proper test status (e.g., 'Pass' or 'Fail').

### Part 3: Job URL

If we leave things as they are we'll have a hard time correlating test failures with the Sauce Labs job that they ran in. Let's remedy that now.

```ruby
# filename: spec/spec_helper.rb
# ...
  config.after(:each) do |example|
    begin
      if ENV['host'] == 'saucelabs'
        if example.exception.nil?
          SauceWhisk::Jobs.pass_job @driver.session_id
        else
          SauceWhisk::Jobs.fail_job @driver.session_id
          raise "Watch a video of the test at https://saucelabs.com/tests/#{@driver.session_id}"
        end
      end
    ensure
      @driver.quit
    end
  end

end
```

In `config.after(:each)` we `raise` a custom exception when there's a test failure and when we're running on Sauce Labs. The custom exception includes a URL to the Sauce Labs job which we create with `@driver.session_id`. In order for `@driver.quit` to run when an exception is raised, we wrap it with an `ensure` (inside of a `begin` block). This ensures that `@driver.quit` will execute regardless of what happens.

Now when we run our test suite and a test fails, it will read with a helpful URL to the Sauce Labs job.

> Watch a video of the test at https://saucelabs.com/tests/8b075a49cb20477f9aa820de4d196ac5

### Part 4: Accessing Private Apps

There are various ways that companies make their pre-production application available for testing. Some use an obscure public URL and protect it with some form of authentication (e.g., Basic Auth, or cert based authentication). Others keep it behind their firewall. For those that stay behind a firewall, Sauce Labs has you covered.

They have a program called [Sauce Connect](https://docs.saucelabs.com/reference/sauce-connect/) that creates a secure tunnel between your machine and their cloud. With it, you can run tests in Sauce Labs and test applications that are only available on your private network.

To use Sauce Connect, you need to download and run it. There's a copy for each operating system -- get yours [here](https://docs.saucelabs.com/reference/sauce-connect/#basic-setup) and run it from the command-line. In the context of our existing test code let's download Sauce Connect, unzip it's contents, and store it in a sub-folder in the `vendor` directory.

```text
.
├── Gemfile
├── Gemfile.lock
├── config
│   ├── cloud.rb
│   └── local.rb
├── pages
│   ├── base_page.rb
│   ├── dynamic_loading.rb
│   └── login.rb
├── spec
│   ├── dynamic_loading_spec.rb
│   ├── login_spec.rb
│   └── spec_helper.rb
└── vendor
    ├── chromedriver
    └── geckodriver
    └── sauce-connect
        ├── bin
        │   ├── sc
        │   └── sc.dSYM
        │       └── Contents
        │           ├── Info.plist
        │           └── Resources
        │               └── DWARF
        │                   └── sc
        ├── include
        │   └── sauceconnect.h
        ├── lib
        │   ├── libsauceconnect.a
        │   └── libsauceconnect.la
        └── license.html
```

Now we just need to launch the application while specifying our Sauce account credentials.

```
> vendor/sauce-connect/bin/sc -u your-sauce-username -k your-sauce-access-key
Sauce Connect 4.3.11, build 1760 53519d5
Starting up; pid 38259
Command line arguments: vendor/sauce-connect/bin/sc -u the-internet -k ****
Using no proxy for connecting to Sauce Labs REST API.
Resolving saucelabs.com to 162.222.75.243 took 36 ms.
Started scproxy on port 64531.
Please wait for 'you may start your tests' to start your tests.
Starting secure remote tunnel VM...
Secure remote tunnel VM provisioned.
Tunnel ID: 7df798c046d042b2a90ef46db205293c
Secure remote tunnel VM is now: booting
Secure remote tunnel VM is now: running
Using no proxy for connecting to tunnel VM.
Resolving tunnel hostname to 162.222.75.23 took 43ms.
Starting Selenium listener...
Establishing secure TLS connection to tunnel...
Selenium listener started on port 4445.
Sauce Connect is up, you may start your tests.
```

Now that the tunnel is established, we could run our tests against a local instance of our application (e.g., [the-internet](https://github.com/tourdedave/the-internet)). Assuming the application was set up and running on our local machine, we could run `base_url=http://localhost:4567 rspec -r ./config_cloud.rb` from the command-line and it would work.

To see the status of the tunnel, we can view it on [the tunnel page of the account dashboard](https://saucelabs.com/tunnels). To shut the tunnel down, we can do it manually from this page. Or we can issue a `Ctrl+C` command to the terminal window where its running.

When the tunnel is closing, here's what you'll see.

```
Cleaning up.
Checking domain overlap for my domain sauce-connect.proxy, other tunnel domain sauce-connect.proxy
Overlapping domain: sauce-connect.proxy, shutting down tunnel 7df798c046d042b2a90ef46db205293c.
Goodbye.
```

### Part 5: A Small Bit Of Clean-up

Now that we have two config files, let's move them into their own directory and pare down the names for simplicity. Let's create a `config` directory and rename the files to `local.rb` and `cloud.rb`.

This leaves our directory tree structure looking like this:

```text
.
├── Gemfile
├── Gemfile.lock
├── config
│   ├── cloud.rb
│   └── local.rb
├── pages
│   ├── base_page.rb
│   ├── dynamic_loading.rb
│   └── login.rb
├── spec
│   ├── dynamic_loading_spec.rb
│   ├── login_spec.rb
│   └── spec_helper.rb
└── vendor
    ├── chromedriver
    └── geckodriver
    └── sauce-connect
        ├── bin
        │   ├── sc
        │   └── sc.dSYM
        │       └── Contents
        │           ├── Info.plist
        │           └── Resources
        │               └── DWARF
        │                   └── sc
        ├── include
        │   └── sauceconnect.h
        ├── lib
        │   ├── libsauceconnect.a
        │   └── libsauceconnect.la
        └── license.html
```
