# Speeding Up Your Test Runs

It's great that we can easily run our tests in Sauce Labs. But it's a real bummer that all of our tests are executing in series. As our suite grows it will take longer and longer for it to finish running, which puts a real damper on our ability to get feedback quickly.

With parallelization we can remedy this. And in Ruby there is a library that makes this simple to accomplish.

Enter [parallel_tests](https://github.com/grosser/parallel_tests).

## Setup

After installing the library we just have to change out the command we use to execute our test runs. Instead of `rspec` we will use one that parallel_tests provides -- `parallel_rspec`.

```ruby
# filename: Gemfile
source 'https://rubygems.org'

gem 'rspec', '~>3.8.0'
gem 'selenium-webdriver', '~>4.0.0.alpha.2'
gem 'parallel_tests', '~>2.29.1'
```

`parallel_rspec` is effectively a wrapper around RSpec. It's responsible for breaking our spec files into groups and launching each of them in separate system processes along with any arguments we pass in to configure RSpec. So we can still provide our `-r` for a config file, we just have to specify `--test-options` before-hand.

To run our tests in parallel with Sauce Labs (without the secure tunnel), then we would use `parallel_rspec --test-options '-r ./config/cloud.rb' spec`. Note the additional `spec` at the end of the command. This tells `parallel_rspec` where the test files live (which is in the `spec` directory).

These extra arguments can seem a little verbose, but it's a small price to pay for gaining parallel test execution.

## Randomizing

A great way to make sure your tests don't have any inter-dependencies (and to ferret out possible anomalies in your application under test) is to run your tests in a random order. Within RSpec this is an easy thing to accomplish. It's just another command-line argument to pass in at runtime.

```ruby
parralel_rspec --test-options '--order random'
```

This coupled with parallelization will make your tests really work for you.


