# Running A Different Browser Locally

It's fairly straightforward to get your tests running locally against a single browser (that's what we've been doing up until now). But when you want to run them against additional browsers like Chrome, Safari, and Internet Explorer you quickly run into configuration overhead that can seem cumbersome and lacking in good documentation.

__NOTE: An alternative to downloading browser drivers manually is to use the compendium `npm` packages that fetch the latest version for you and manage updating the path. There is one for each browser driver (e.g., `npm intall geckdriver`, `npm install chromedriver`, etc.). But if you need a specific browser driver version, then downloading them manually is the way to go.__

## A Brief Primer On Browser Drivers

With the introduction of WebDriver (circa Selenium 2) a lot of benefits were realized (e.g., more effective and faster browser execution, no more single host origin issues, etc). But with it came some architectural and configuration differences that may not be widely known. Namely -- browser drivers.

WebDriver works with each of the major browsers through a browser driver which is (ideally but not always) maintained by the browser manufacturer. It is an executable file (consider it a thin layer or a shim) that acts as a bridge between Selenium and the browser.

Let's step through an example using [ChromeDriver](https://sites.google.com/a/chromium.org/chromedriver/).

## An Example

Before starting, we'll need to download the latest ChromeDriver binary executable for our operating system from [here](http://chromedriver.storage.googleapis.com/index.html) (pick the highest numbered directory) and store the unzipped contents of it in our `vendor` directory.

```text
├── pages
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── base_page.py
│   ├── dynamic_loading_page.py
│   ├── login_page.py
├── tests
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── config.py
│   ├── conftest.py
│   ├── dynamic_loading_test.py
│   └── login_test.py
└── vendor
    └── chromedriver
    └── geckodriver
```

Just like with `gecodriver`, in order for Selenium to use this binary we have to make sure it knows where it is. There are two ways to do that. We can add `chromedriver` to the path of our system, or we can pass in the path to `chromedriver` file when configuring Selenium. For simplicity, let's go with the latter option.

__NOTE: There is a different ChromeDriver binary for each major operating system. If you're using Windows be sure to use the one that ends with `.exe` and specify it in your configuration. This example was built to run on OSX (which does not have a file extension).__

We'll also want to make sure our test suite can run either Firefox or Chrome. To do that, we'll need to make a couple of changes.

First, let's add a `browser` value to our `config.py` file.

```python
# filename: config.py
baseurl = ""
browser = ""
```

Now to update `conftest.py` to receive the browser name as a command-line argument.

```python
# filename: tests/conftest.py
import pytest
import os
from selenium import webdriver
from selenium.webdriver.firefox.service import Service as FirefoxService
from selenium.webdriver.chrome.service import Service as ChromeService
from . import config


def pytest_addoption(parser):
    parser.addoption("--baseurl",
                     action="store",
                     default="http://the-internet.herokuapp.com",
                     help="base URL for the application under test")
    parser.addoption("--browser",
                     action="store",
                     default="firefox",
                     help="the name of the browser you want to test with")


@pytest.fixture
def driver(request):
    config.baseurl = request.config.getoption("--baseurl")
    config.browser = request.config.getoption("--browser").lower()

    if config.browser == "firefox":
        _geckodriver = os.path.join(os.getcwd(), 'vendor', 'geckodriver')
        if os.path.isfile(_geckodriver):
            _service = FirefoxService(executable_path=_geckodriver)
            driver_ = webdriver.Firefox(service=_service)
        else:
            driver_ = webdriver.Firefox()
    elif config.browser == "chrome":
        _chromedriver = os.path.join(os.getcwd() + 'vendor', 'chromedriver')
        if os.path.isfile(_chromedriver):
            _service = ChromeService(executable_path=_geckodriver)
            driver_ = webdriver.Chrome(service=_service)
        else:
            driver_ = webdriver.Chrome()

    def quit():
        driver_.quit()

    request.addfinalizer(quit)
    return driver_
```

After we specify a new command-line argument and a sensible default (e.g., `"firefox"`) we grab the value for it in our fixture, storing it in `config.browser`. We then use this in a conditional to check which value was passed in. If `"firefox"` was provided, we create a Selenium instance like we've been doing. If `"chrome"` is provided, we grab the full path to the `chromedriver` binary and pass it as an argument during instantiation in order to get at Chrome instance.

Now we can specify Chrome as our browser when launching our tests (e.g., `pytest --browser=chrome`).

It's worth noting that this will only be reasonably performant since it is launching and terminating the ChromeDriver binary executable before and after every test. There are alternative ways to set this up, but this is good enough to see where our tests fall down in Chrome (and it will not be the primary way we will run our tests a majority of the time anyway -- more on that later in the book).

## Additional Browsers

A similar approach can be applied to other browser drivers, with the only real limitation being the operating system you're running. But remember -- __no two browser drivers are alike__. Be sure to check out the documentation for the browser you care about to find out the specific requirements:

+ [ChromeDriver](https://sites.google.com/a/chromium.org/chromedriver/)
+ [EdgeDriver](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/webdriver)
+ [geckodriver (Firefox)](https://github.com/mozilla/geckodriver)
+ [InternetExplorerDriver](https://github.com/SeleniumHQ/selenium/wiki/InternetExplorerDriver)
+ [SafariDriver](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/webkit/testing_with_webdriver_in_safari)


