# Running Browsers In The Cloud

If you've ever needed to test features in an older browser like Internet Explorer 9 or 10 then odds are you ran a virtual machine (VM) on your computer with a "legit" version of Windows.

Handy, but what happens when you need to check things on multiple versions of IE? Now you're looking at multiple VMs. And what about when you need cover other browser and Operating System (OS) combinations? Now you're looking at provisioning, running, and maintaining your own set of machines and standing up something like Selenium Grid to coordinate tests across them.

Rather than take on the overhead of a test infrastructure you can easily outsource this to a third-party cloud provider like [Sauce Labs](https://saucelabs.com/).

## A Selenium `webdriver.remote`, Selenium Grid, And Sauce Labs Primer

At the heart of Selenium at scale is the use of Selenium Grid and Selenium `webdriver.remote`.

Selenium Grid lets you distribute test execution across several machines and you connect to it with Selenium `webdriver.remote`. You tell the Grid which browser and OS you want your test to run on through the use of Selenium's class object [`desired_capabilities`](https://www.selenium.dev/selenium/docs/api/py/webdriver/selenium.webdriver.common.desired_capabilities.html?highlight=capabilities#selenium.webdriver.common.desired_capabilities), and its various subclasses for specific browser options (`chrome.options`, `firefox.options`, etc.)

Generally speaking, running tests on Sauce Labs is similar to running tests on a Selenium Grid behind the scenes. They receive and execute tests through Selenium `webdriver.remote` with the browser and operating system that you set. Sauce Labs has [specific language bindings](https://github.com/saucelabs/sauce_bindings) that act as wrappers for supported programming languages. This makes connecting and working with the Sauce Labs platform much easier.

Let's dig in with an example.

## An Example

### Part 1: Initial Setup

__NOTE: You'll need an account to use Sauce Labs. Their [free trial](https://saucelabs.com/signup/trial) offers enough to get you started. And if you're signing up because you want to test an open source project, then be sure to check out their [Open Sauce account](https://saucelabs.com/open-source).__

With Sauce Labs we need to provide specifics about what we want in our test environment, our credentials, and configure Selenium a little bit differently. Let's start by updating our `config.py` file to store these details.

```python
# filename: config.py
baseurl = ""
host = ""
browser = ""
browserversion = ""
platform = ""
```

In addition to the `baseurl` and `browser` variables, we've added some more (e.g., `host`, `browserversion`, and `platform`).

`host` enables us to specify whether our tests run locally or on Sauce Labs.

With `browser`, `browserveresion`, and `platform` we can specify which browser and operating system combination we want our tests to run on. You can see a full list of Sauce's available platform options [here](https://saucelabs.com/platforms/). They also have a handy configuration generator (which will tell you what values to plug into your test) [here](https://docs.saucelabs.com/reference/platforms-configurator/).

Now we can update our `conftest.py` file to work with Selenium Remote. Let's start by pulling in the new configuration values.

```python
# filename: tests/conftest.py
# ...
def pytest_addoption(parser):
    parser.addoption("--baseurl",
                     action="store",
                     default="http://the-internet.herokuapp.com",
                     help="base URL for the application under test")
    parser.addoption("--host",
                     action="store",
                     default="saucelabs",
                     help="where to run your tests: localhost or saucelabs")
    parser.addoption("--browser",
                     action="store",
                     default="internet explorer",
                     help="the name of the browser you want to test with")
    parser.addoption("--browserversion",
                     action="store",
                     default="10.0",
                     help="the browser version you want to test with")
    parser.addoption("--platform",
                     action="store",
                     default="Windows 7",
                     help="the operating system to run your tests on (saucelabs only)")
# ...
```

And now to update our fixture.

```python
# filename: tests/conftest.py
# ...
@pytest.fixture
def driver(request):
    config.baseurl = request.config.getoption("--baseurl")
    config.host = request.config.getoption("--host").lower()
    config.browser = request.config.getoption("--browser").lower()
    config.browserversion = request.config.getoption("--browserversion").lower()
    config.platform = request.config.getoption("--platform").lower()

    if config.host == "saucelabs":
        _desired_caps = {}
        _desired_caps["browserName"] = config.browser
        _desired_caps["browserVersion"] = config.browserversion
        _desired_caps["platformName"] = config.platform
        _credentials = os.environ["SAUCE_USERNAME"] + ":" + os.environ["SAUCE_ACCESS_KEY"]
        _url = "https://" + _credentials + "@ondemand.saucelabs.com/wd/hub"
        driver_ = webdriver.Remote(_url, _desired_caps)
    elif config.host == "localhost":
# ...
```

In the beginning of our fixture we grab the command-line values and store them in an instance of `config.py`, which we'll use throughout the fixture. We also amended our conditional flow to check the `host` variable first. We start by checking to see if it's set to `"localhost"` or `"saucelabs"`. If it's set to `"localhost"` we carry on just like before (checking the `browser` value to determine which browser to launch locally).

If it's set to `"saucelabs"` we create a Desired Capabilities object (e.g., `_desired_caps`), populate it with the `browser`, `browserversion`, and `platform` values and Sauce Labs account credentials (e.g., `"username"` and `"accessKey"` which are being pulled out of environment variables I've configured on my local machine). We then connect to Sauce Labs using Selenium Remote and pass in the `_desired_caps` object. This will return a Selenium WebDriver instance that we can use just like when running our tests locally, except the browser is living on a machine in Sauce Labs' cloud.

If we save everything and run our tests they will execute in Sauce Labs and on the account dashboard we'll see our tests running in Internet Explorer 10 on Windows 7. To run the tests on different browser and operating system combinations, then simply provide their values as command-line options (e.g., `pytest --browser=name --browserversion=version --platform=os`). For a full list of possible options be sure to check out [the Sauce Labs Platform Configurator](https://wiki.saucelabs.com/display/DOCS/Platform+Configurator#/).

### Part 2: Test Name

It's great that our tests are running on Sauce Labs. But we're not done yet because the test name in each Sauce job is getting set to `unnamed job`. This makes it extremely challenging to know what test was run in the job. To remedy this we'll need to pass in the test name in the `_desired_caps` object.

```python
# filename: tests/conftest.py
# ...
    if config.host == "saucelabs":
        _desired_caps = {}
        _desired_caps["browserName"] = config.browser
        _desired_caps["version"] = config.browserversion
        _desired_caps["platform"] = config.platform
        _desired_caps["name"] = request.cls.__name__ + "." + request.function.__name__
        _credentials = os.environ["SAUCE_USERNAME"] + ":" + os.environ["SAUCE_ACCESS_KEY"]
        _url = "https://" + _credentials + "@ondemand.saucelabs.com/wd/hub"
        driver_ = webdriver.Remote(_url, _desired_caps)
# ...
```

From the `request` object we can pull the name of the test class (e.g., `request.cls.__name__`) and the name of the test method that's currently running (e.g., `request.function.__name__`). We grab this information and store it in the `_desired_caps` object and pass it into the Sauce Labs session.

Now when we run our tests in Sauce Labs, [the account dashboard](https://saucelabs.com/account) will show the tests running with a correct name.

### Part 3: Test Status

There's still one more thing we'll need to handle, and that's setting the status of the Sauce Labs job after it completes.

Right now regardless of the outcome of a test, the job in Sauce Labs will register as `Finished`. Ideally we want to know if the job was a `Pass` or a `Fail`. That way we can tell at a glance if a test failed or not. And with a couple of tweaks we can make this happen easily enough.

First we need to leverage another helper method in pytest.

```python
# filename: tests/conftest.py
# ...
@pytest.hookimpl(tryfirst=True, hookwrapper=True)
def pytest_runtest_makereport(item, call):
    outcome = yield
    result = outcome.get_result()
    setattr(item, "result_" + result.when, result)
```

With `pytest_runtest_makereport` we're able to grab the outcome of a test as it's running and append the result to a node in the request object that we're using in our fixture. There are three phases that are reported on -- `setup`, `call`, and `teardown`. `call` is the one we care about since it's the test run. So the method that we'll use in the request object is `request.node.result_call`.

Now let's update our fixture to use it.

```python
# filename: conftest.py
# ...
    def quit():
        try:
            if config.host == "saucelabs":
                if request.node.result_call.failed:
                    driver_.execute_script("sauce:job-result=failed")
                    print "https://saucelabs.com/tests/" + driver_.session_id
                elif request.node.result_call.passed:
                    driver_.execute_script("sauce:job-result=passed")
        finally:
            driver_.quit()
# ...
```

We first check to see if our tests are running against Sauce Labs. If so we check to see what the test status was (e.g., `request.node.result_call.failed` or `request.node.result_call.passed`) and execute a snippet of JavaScript to communicate to Sauce what the test outcome was. If the test failed, we also output the URL of the job to the console. We wrap all of this in a `try` block so that if there is an issue `driver_.quit()` will still get executed.

Now when we run our tests in Sauce Labs and navigate to [the Sauce Labs Account dashboard](https://saucelabs.com/account), we will see our tests running like before. But now there will be a proper test status when they finish (e.g., `Pass` or `Fail`) and we'll see the URL for the job in the console output as well. This enables us to easily jump to the specific job in Sauce Labs.

### Part 4: Sauce Connect

There are various ways that companies make their pre-production application available for testing. Some use an obscure public URL and protect it with some form of authentication (e.g., Basic Auth, or certificate based authentication). Others keep it behind their firewall. For those that stay behind a firewall, Sauce Labs has you covered.

They have a program called [Sauce Connect](https://wiki.saucelabs.com/display/DOCS/Setting+Up+Sauce+Connect+Proxy) that creates a secure tunnel between your machine and their private cloud. With it you can run tests in Sauce Labs and test applications that are only available on your private network.

To use Sauce Connect you need to download and run it. There's a copy for each operating system -- get yours [here](https://wiki.saucelabs.com/display/DOCS/Setting+Up+Sauce+Connect+Proxy) and run it from the command-line. In the context of our existing test code let's download Sauce Connect, unzip it's contents, and store it in our `vendor` directory.

```text
├── pages
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── base_page.py
│   ├── dynamic_loading_page.py
│   ├── login_page.py
├── tests
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── config.py
│   ├── conftest.py
│   ├── dynamic_loading_test.py
│   └── login_test.py
└── vendor
    ├── chromedriver
    └── geckodriver
    └── sc
```

Now we just need to launch the application while specifying our Sauce account credentials.

```sh
vendor/sc/bin/sc -u $SAUCE_USERNAME -k $SAUCE_ACCESS_KEY
Sauce Connect 4.3.16, build 2399 c7e5fec
*** WARNING: open file limit 7168 is too low!
*** Sauce Labs recommends setting it to at least 8000.
Starting up; pid 58426
Command line arguments: vendor/sc-4.3.16-osx/bin/sc -u the-internet -k ****
Log file: /tmp/sc.log
Pid file: /tmp/sc_client.pid
Timezone: EDT GMT offset: -4h
Using no proxy for connecting to Sauce Labs REST API.
Resolving saucelabs.com to 162.222.75.243 took 68 ms.
Started scproxy on port 49310.
Please wait for 'you may start your tests' to start your tests.
Starting secure remote tunnel VM...
Secure remote tunnel VM provisioned.
Tunnel ID: 21ff9664b06c4edaa4bd573cdc1fbac1
Secure remote tunnel VM is now: booting
Secure remote tunnel VM is now: running
Using no proxy for connecting to tunnel VM.
Resolving tunnel hostname to 162.222.76.147 took 55ms.
Starting Selenium listener...
Establishing secure TLS connection to tunnel...
Selenium listener started on port 4445.
Sauce Connect is up, you may start your tests.
```

Now that the tunnel is established, we could run our tests against a local instance of our application (e.g., [the-internet](https://github.com/tourdedave/the-internet)). Assuming the application was set up and running on our local machine, we run our tests against it by specifying a different base URL at runtime (e.g., `pytest --baseurl=http://localhost:4567`) and they would work.

To see the status of the tunnel, we can view it on [the tunnel page of the account dashboard](https://saucelabs.com/tunnels). To shut the tunnel down, we can do it manually from this page. Or we can issue a `Ctrl+C` command to the terminal window where it's running.

When the tunnel is closing, here's what you'll see.

```sh
Got signal 2
Cleaning up.
Removing tunnel 21ff9664b06c4edaa4bd573cdc1fbac1.
All jobs using tunnel have finished.
Waiting for the connection to terminate...
Connection closed (8).
Goodbye.
```


