# Speeding Up Your Test Runs

We've made huge strides by leveraging page objects, a base page object, explicit waits, and connecting our tests to Sauce Labs. But we're not done yet. Our tests still take a good deal of time to run since they're executing in series (e.g., one after another). As our suite grows this slowness will grow with it.

With parallelization we can easily remedy this pain before it becomes acute by executing multiple tests at the same time. And with pytest there's a plugin that makes this turnkey to setup.

## Configuration

With [pytest-xdist](https://github.com/pytest-dev/pytest-xdist) we get parallel execution. First we need to install it.

```text
pip3 install pytest-xdist
```

Now our tests will be able to run in parallel. We just need to specify the number of processes we want to use which we can do with the `-n` runtime flag.

```text
pytest -n 5
```

Alternatively we can specify `-n auto` if we want pytest to detect the number of processors on the machine and spin up an according number of processes.

__NOTE: If you're using Sauce Labs be sure to see what your concurrency limit is (e.g., number of available concurrent virtual machines). It's listed on the My Account page in the [Account Dashboard](https://saucelabs.com/account). This number will be the limiter to how many parallel tests you can run at once. The recommendation is to set the number of processes for your test runs to equal the concurrency limit. So if you have 3 VMs then set your test runs to `-n 3`.__

## Random Order Execution

When enabling parallel execution in your tests you may start to see odd, inconsistent behavior that is hard to track down.

This is often due to dependencies between tests that you didn't know were there. A great way to expose these kinds of issues and ensure your tests are ready for prime time is to execute them in a random order. This also has the added benefit of exercising the application you're testing in a random order (which could unearth previously unnoticed bugs).

With the [pytest-randomly plugin](https://github.com/adamchainz/pytest-randomly) this is turnkey to get going.

```text
pip3 install pytest-randomly
```

Now when we run our tests they will run in a random order.

__NOTE: Each time a test runs a seed number will be presented in the console output. If we want to rerun the tests using the exact same order to try and reproduce a failure we can provide the seed number using the `--randomly-seed=` flag. And if want to disable random order execution then we specify `-p no:randomly` at run-time.__


