# Writing Your First Test

Fundamentally, Selenium works with two pieces of information -- the element on a page you want to use and what you want to do with it. This one-two punch will be repeated over and over until you achieve the outcome you want in your application -- at which point you will perform an assertion to confirm that the result is what you intended.

Let's take logging in to a website as an example. With Selenium you would:

1. Visit the login page of a site
2. Find the login form's username field and input the username
3. Find the login form's password field and input the password
4. Find the submit button and click it

Selenium is able to find and interact with elements on a page by way of various locator strategies. The list includes (sorted alphabetically):

+ Class
+ CSS Selector
+ ID
+ Link Text
+ Name
+ Partial Link Text
+ Tag Name
+ XPath

While each serves a purpose, you only need to know a few to start writing effective tests.

## How To Find Locators

The simplest way to find locators is to inspect the elements on a page. The best way to do this is from within your web browser. Fortunately, popular browsers come pre-loaded with development tools that make this simple to accomplish.

When viewing the page, __right-click__ on the element you want to interact with and click __Inspect Element__. This will bring up a small window with all of the markup for the page but zoomed into your highlighted selection. From here you can see if there are unique or descriptive attributes you can work with.

## How To Find Quality Elements

You want to find an element that is __unique__, __descriptive__, and __unlikely to change__.

Ripe candidates for this are `id` and `class` attributes. Whereas text (e.g., the text of a link) is less ideal since it is more apt to change. This may not hold true for when you make assertions, but it's a good goal to strive for.

If the elements you are attempting to work with don't have unique `id` or `class` attributes directly on them, look at the element that houses them (a.k.a. the parent element). Oftentimes the parent element has a unique element that you can use to start with and walk down to the child element you want to use.

When you can't find any unique elements have a conversation with your development team letting them know what you are trying to accomplish. It's typically a trivial thing for them to add helpful semantic markup to a page to make it more testable. This is especially true when they know the use case you're trying to automate. The alternative can be a lengthy and painful process which will probably yield working test code but it will be brittle and hard to maintain.

Once you've identified the target elements for your test, you need to craft a locator using one Selenium's strategies.

## An Example

### Part 1: Find The Elements And Write The Test

Here's the markup for a standard login form (pulled from [the login example on the-internet](http://the-internet.herokuapp.com/login)).

```html
<form name="login" id="login" action="/authenticate" method="post">
   <div class="row">
    <div class="large-6 small-12 columns">
      <label for="username">Username</label>
      <input type="text" name="username" id="username">
    </div>
  </div>
  <div class="row">
    <div class="large-6 small-12 columns">
      <label for="password">Password</label>
      <input type="password" name="password" id="password">
    </div>
  </div>
    <button class="radius" type="submit"><i class="icon-2x icon-signin"> Login</i></button>
</form>
```

Note the unique elements on the form. The username input field has a unique `id`, as does the password input field. The submit button doesn't, but it's the only button on the page so we can easily find it and click it.

Let's put these elements to use in our first test. First we'll need to create a new folder called `test` in the root of our project directory. This is a default folder that Mocha will know to look for. In it we'll create a new test file called `LoginTest.js`. We'll also need to create a `vendor` directory for third-party files and download [`geckodriver`](https://github.com/mozilla/geckodriver) into it. Grab the latest release from [here](https://github.com/mozilla/geckodriver/releases/latest) and unpack its contents into the `vendor` directory. This is a required file (known as a browser driver) in order to make Selenium work with Firefox 48 and newer. See [Chapter 12](#chapter12) for more detail about browser drivers.

When we're done our directory structure should look like this (minus the requisite `node_modules` directory).

```text
├── package.json
└── test
    └── LoginTest.js
└── vendor
    └── geckodriver
```

And here is the code we will add to the test file for our Selenium commands, locators, etc.

```javascript
// filename: test/LoginTest.js
'use strict';
var webdriver = require('selenium-webdriver');
var test = require('selenium-webdriver/testing');

test.describe('Login', function() {
  this.timeout(30000);
  var driver;

  test.beforeEach(function() {
    var vendorDirectory = process.cwd() + '/vendor';
    process.env.PATH = vendorDirectory + ":$PATH";
    driver = new webdriver.Builder().forBrowser('firefox').build();
  });

  test.afterEach(function() {
    driver.quit();
  });

  test.it('with valid credentials', function() {
    driver.get('http://the-internet.herokuapp.com/login');
    driver.findElement({id: 'username'}).sendKeys('tomsmith');
    driver.findElement({id: 'password'}).sendKeys('SuperSecretPassword!');
    driver.findElement({css: 'button'}).click();
  });

});
```

At the top of the file we specify `'use strict';`. This places our test code into a tighter, safer operating context. It will protect us by throwing exceptions with helpful information when we do something "unsafe" or make a blunder in our code. Next we import the requisite classes for Selenium. One is to create and control an instance of Selenium. The other is a wrapper for Mocha that will help ensure that the tests execute in a synchronous fashion.

We declare a test class with `test.describe('Login', function() {` and specify a timeout for Mocha in milliseconds (e.g., `this.timeout(30000)`). The default timeout for Mocha is `2000` milliseconds (or 2 seconds). If we don't change it then our test will fail before the browser finishes loading. Next we declare a `driver` variable where we'll store our instance of Selenium. We handle the setup and teardown of Selenium in `test.beforeEach` and `test.afterEach` methods. This ensures that a clean instance of Selenium is created before each test and destroyed after each test. To create an instance of Selenium we call `new webdriver.Builder().forBrowser('firefox').build();` and store it in a our `driver` variable. In order for the instantiation of Selenium to work with Firefox we need to specify the path to the directory where the `geckodriver` file is. We do this by finding the path to the current working directory, appending `/vendor` to it, and adding the final value to he system path.

__NOTE: If you are testing on an older version of Firefox (e.g., 47 or earlier) you can still run your tests by using the legacy FirefoxDriver implementation. To do that you need to disable Marionette (the new Firefox WebDriver implementation that geckodriver connects to) by setting an environment for it, which looks like this: process.env.SELENIUM_MARIONETTE=false`__

Our test method starts with `test.it` and a helfpul name (e.g., `'with valid credentials'`). In this test we're visiting the login page by its URL (with `driver.get()`), finding the input fields by their ID (with `driver.findElement({id: 'username'});`), inputting text into them (with `.sendKeys();`), and submitting the form by clicking the submit button (e.g., `driver.findElement({css: 'button'}).click()`).

If we save this and run it (by running `mocha` from the command-line), it will run and pass. But there's one thing missing -- an assertion. In order to find an element to write an assertion against we need to see what the markup of the page is after submitting the login form.

### Part 2: Figure Out What To Assert

Here is the markup that renders on the page after logging in.

```html
<div class="row">
  <div id="flash-messages" class="large-12 columns">
    <div data-alert="" id="flash" class="flash success">
      You logged into a secure area!
      <a href="#" class="close">x</a>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div id="content" class="large-12 columns">
  <div class="example">
    <h2><i class="icon-lock"></i> Secure Area</h2>
    <h4 class="subheader">Welcome to the Secure Area. When you are done click logout below.</h4>
    <a class="button secondary radius" href="/logout"><i class="icon-2x icon-signout"> Logout</i></a>
  </div>
</div>
```

There are a couple of elements we can use for our assertion in this markup. There's the flash message class (most appealing), the logout button (appealing), or the copy from either the `h2` or the flash message (least appealing).

Since the flash message class name is descriptive, denotes a successful login, and is less likely to change than the copy, let's go with that.

```html
class="flash success"
```

When we try to access an element like this (e.g., with a multi-worded class) we will need to use a CSS selector or an XPath.

_NOTE: Both CSS selectors and XPath work well, but the examples throughout this book will focus on how to use CSS selectors._

## A Quick Primer on CSS Selectors

In web design CSS (Cascading Style Sheets) are used to apply styles to the markup (HTML) on a page. CSS is able to do this by declaring which bits of the markup it wants to alter through the use of selectors. Selenium operates in a similar manner but instead of changing the style of elements, it interacts with them by clicking, getting values, typing, sending keys, etc.

CSS selectors are a pretty straightforward and handy way to write locators, especially for hard to reach elements.

For right now, here's what you need to know. In CSS, class names start with a dot (`.`). For classes with multiple words, put a dot in front of __each__ word, and remove the space between them (e.g., `.flash.success` for `class='flash success'`).

For a good resource on CSS Selectors I encourage you to check out [Sauce Labs' write up on them](https://saucelabs.com/resources/articles/selenium-tips-css-selectors).

### Part 3: Write The Assertion And Verify It

Now that we have our locator, let's add an assertion that uses it.

```javascript
// filename: test/LoginTest.js
'use strict';
var webdriver = require('selenium-webdriver');
var test = require('selenium-webdriver/testing');
var assert = require('assert');
// ...
  test.it('with valid credentials', function() {
    driver.get('http://the-internet.herokuapp.com/login');
    driver.findElement({id: 'username'}).sendKeys('tomsmith');
    driver.findElement({id: 'password'}).sendKeys('SuperSecretPassword!');
    driver.findElement({css: 'button'}).click();
    driver.findElement({css: '.flash.success'}).isDisplayed().then(function(elementDisplayed) {
      assert.equal(elementDisplayed, true, 'Success message not displayed');
    });
  });
```

With `assert` we are checking for a `true` Boolean response. If one is not received the test will fail. With Selenium we are seeing if the success message element is displayed on the page (with `.isDisplayed()`). This Selenium command returns a promise which ultimately returns a boolean. To account for this we need to call `.then` and specify a variable. This variable will contain the boolean response. So we perform a check against it (e.g., `elementDisplayed`) instead of the Selenium command directly. If the element is rendered on the page and is visible (e.g., not hidden or covered up by an overlay), `true` will be returned, and our test will pass.

But we're not done yet. Unfortunately if we run this it would fail due to [a documented bug in `geckodriver`](https://github.com/mozilla/geckodriver/issues/308). Clicking the submit button triggers a new page to load and under normal circumstances Selenium would automatically wait for this new page to initially load before looking for the `.flash.success` element. As of right now this automatic wait is not observed which will cause Selenium to inadvertently look for an element that hasn't appeared yet. To account for this, we'll need to add a brief delay into our test.

```javascript
// filename: test/LoginTest.js
'use strict';
var sleep = require('sleep');
// ...
  test.it('with valid credentials', function() {
    driver.get('http://the-internet.herokuapp.com/login');
    driver.findElement({id: 'username'}).sendKeys('tomsmith');
    driver.findElement({id: 'password'}).sendKeys('SuperSecretPassword!');
    driver.findElement({css: 'button'}).click().then(function() {
      sleep.sleep(1);
    });
    driver.findElement({css: '.flash.success'}).isDisplayed().then(function(elementDisplayed) {
      assert.equal(elementDisplayed, true, 'Success message not displayed');
    });
  });

});
```

__NOTE: Adding a hard-coded sleep (even for just `1` second) is NOT a recommended practice. There are MUCH better ways to make your test wait. They'll be covered in [Chapter 10](#chapter10) where we'll also revisit this code and improve upon it to remove this hard-coded sleep.__

When we save this and run it (e.g. `mocha` from the command-line) it will run and pass just like before, but now there is an assertion which will catch a failure if something is amiss.

### Just To Make Sure

Just to make certain that this test is doing what we think it should, let's change the locator in the assertion to attempt to __force a failure__ and run it again. A simple fudging of the locator will suffice.

```javascript
    driver.findElement({css: '.flash.successasdf'}).isDisplayed().then(function(elementDisplayed) {
      assert.equal(elementDisplayed, true, 'Success message not displayed');
    });
```

If it fails then we can feel reasonably confident that the test is doing what we expect and we can change the assertion back to normal before committing our code.

This trick will save you more trouble that you know. Practice it often.
