# Writing Re-usable Test Code

One of the biggest challenges with Selenium tests is that they can be brittle and challenging to maintain over time. This is largely due to the fact that things in the application you're testing change -- causing your tests to break.

But the reality of a software project is that _change is a constant_. So we need to account for this reality somehow in our test code in order to be successful.

Enter Page Objects.

## A Page Objects Primer

Rather than write your test code directly against your app, you can model the behavior of your application into simple objects and write your tests against them instead. That way when your app changes and your tests break, you only have to update your test code in one place to fix it.

With this approach we not only get the benefit of controlled chaos, we also get reusable functionality across our suite of tests and more readable tests.

## An Example

### Part 1: Create A Page Object And Update Test

Let's take our login example from earlier, create a page object for it, and update our test accordingly.

First we'll need to create a new folder called `pages` in the root of our project (just like we did for `test`). In it we'll add a `LoginPage.js` file. When we're done our directory structure should look like this.

```text
├── package.json
├── pages
│   └── LoginPage.js
└── test
    └── LoginTest.js
└── vendor
    └── geckodriver
```

Here's the code that goes with it.

```javascript
// filename: pages/LoginPage.js
const USERNAME_INPUT = { id: 'username' }
const PASSWORD_INPUT = { id: 'password' }
const SUBMIT_BUTTON = { css: 'button' }
const SUCCESS_MESSAGE = { css: '.flash.success' }

class LoginPage {
  constructor(driver) {
    this.driver = driver
  }

  async load() {
    await this.driver.get('http://the-internet.herokuapp.com/login')
  }

  async authenticate(username, password) {
    await this.driver.findElement(USERNAME_INPUT).sendKeys(username)
    await this.driver.findElement(PASSWORD_INPUT).sendKeys(password)
    await this.driver.findElement(SUBMIT_BUTTON).click()
  }

  async successMessagePresent() {
    return await this.driver.findElement(SUCCESS_MESSAGE).isDisplayed()
  }
}

module.exports = LoginPage
```

At the top of the file we specify some variables. These are for the locators we want to use on the page. We then declare the class by specifying its constructor (e.g., `concstructor(driver) {`). This block will run whenever a new instance of the class is created. In order for this class to work we need access to the Selenium driver object, so we accept it as a parameter in the constructor and store it in the a class variable (e.g., `this.driver`). This enables the rest of the class to use it.

The second method (e.g., `load()`) is responsible for navigating to the page. Since it's asynchronous we can't have this behavior happen in the constructor.

Thie third method (e.g., `authenticate(username, password)`) is the core functionality of the login page. It's responsible for filling in the login form and submitting it. By accepting parameters for the username and password we're able to make the functionality here reusable for additional tests. Also, instead of the hard-coded locators, we updated the Selenium calls with the locator variables we specified at the top of the class.

The last method (e.g., `successMessagePresent()`) is the display check from earlier that was used in our assertion. It will return a boolean result just like before.

The class ends with `module.exports = LoginPage;`. This makes it so the class gets returned as an object when it is required in our test.

Now let's update our test to use this page object.

```javascript
// filename: test/LoginTest.js
const { Builder } = require('selenium-webdriver')
const path = require('path')
const assert = require('assert')
const LoginPage = require('../pages/LoginPage')

describe('Login', function() {
  this.timeout(30000)
  let driver
  let login

  beforeEach(async function() {
    const vendorDirectory =
      path.delimiter + path.join(__dirname, '..', 'vendor')
    process.env.PATH += vendorDirectory
    driver = await new Builder().forBrowser('firefox').build()
    login = new LoginPage(driver)
    await login.load()
  })

  afterEach(async function() {
    await driver.quit()
  })

  it('with valid credentials', async function() {
    await login.authenticate('tomsmith', 'SuperSecretPassword!')
    assert(await login.successMessagePresent(), 'Success message not displayed')
  })
})
```

Before we can use the page object we first need to require it (e.g., `const LoginPage = require('../pages/LoginPage');`). Then it's a simple matter of updating our test setup to create an instance of the login page (storing it in a `login` variable) and updating the test method to use the page object instead.

Now the test is more concise and readable. When you save everything and run it (e.g., `mocha` from the command-line), it will run and pass just like before.

### Part 2: Write Another Test

Creating a page object may feel like more work than what we started with initially. But it's well worth the effort since we're in a much sturdier position and able to easily write follow-on tests (since the specifics of the page are abstracted away for simple reuse).

Let's add another test for a failed login to demonstrate.

First, let's take a look at the markup that gets rendered when we provide invalid credentials:

```html
<div id="flash-messages" class="large-12 columns">
  <div data-alert="" id="flash" class="flash error">
    Your username is invalid!
    <a href="#" class="close">x</a>
  </div>
</div>
```

Here is the element we'll want to use in our assertion.

```html
class="flash error"
```

Let's add a locator for this element to our page object along with a new method to perform a display check against it.

```javascript
// filename: pages/LoginPage.js
// ...
var SUCCESS_MESSAGE = {css: '.flash.success'};
var FAILURE_MESSAGE = {css: '.flash.error'};
// ...
  async failureMessagePresent() {
    return await this.driver.findElement(FAILURE_MESSAGE).isDisplayed()
  }
}

module.exports = LoginPage;
```

Now we're ready to add a test for failed login to our `test/LoginTest.js` file.

```javascript
// filename: test/LoginTest.js
// ...
  it('with invalid credentials', async function() {
    await login.authenticate('tomsmith', 'SuperSecretPassword!')
    assert(await login.failureMessagePresent(), 'Failure message not displayed')
  })
})
```

If we save these changes and run our tests (e.g., `mocha` from the command-line) we will see two browser windows open (one after the other) testing for successful and failure login scenarios.

## Why Checking For The Absence Of An Element Won't Work (yet)

You may be wondering why we didn't just check to see if the success message wasn't present in our assertion.

```javascript
    assert(!(await login.successMessagePresent()), 'Success message displayed')
```

There are two problems with this approach. First, our test will fail because Selenium errors when it looks for an element that's not present on the page -- which looks like this:

```sh
NoSuchElementError: Unable to locate element: {"method":"css selector","selector":".flash.success"}
```

But don't worry, we'll address this in the next chapter.

Second, the absence of a success message doesn't necessarily indicate a failed login. The assertion we ended up with originally is more accurate.

```javascript
// filename: test/LoginTest.js
// ...
  it('with invalid credentials', async function() {
    await login.authenticate('tomsmith', 'bad password')
    assert(await login.failureMessagePresent(), 'Failure message not displayed')
  })
})
```

## Part 3: Confirm We're In The Right Place

Before we can call our page object complete, there's one more addition we should make. We'll want to add a check to make sure that Selenium is in the right place before proceeding, which will in turn, add some resiliency to our tests.

```javascript
// filename: pages/LoginPage.js
// ...
  async load() {
    await this.driver.get('http://the-internet.herokuapp.com/login')
    if (!(await this.driver.findElement(LOGIN_FORM).isDisplayed()))
      throw new Error('Login form not loaded')
  }
// ...
```

In our `load` method of the login page we want to check to see that the login form is displayed after navigating there. If not, we will throw an exception with the message `'Login form not loaded'`, which will error the test before it attempts to log in (and provide this message in the output). Otherwise, the test will proceed without issue.

When we save everything and run our tests they will run just like before. But now we can feel confident that the tests will only proceed if login page is in a ready state.

## Outro

With Page Objects you'll be able to easily maintain and extend your tests. But how you write your Page Objects may vary depending on your preference and experience. The example demonstrated above is a simple approach. It's worth taking a look at the Selenium project wiki page for Page Objects [here](https://github.com/SeleniumHQ/selenium/wiki/PageObjects) (even if its examples are only written in Java). There's also Martin Fowler's seminal blog post on the topic as well ([link](http://martinfowler.com/bliki/PageObject.html)).


