# Running A Different Browser Locally

It's straightforward to get your tests running locally against Firefox (that's what we've been doing up until now). But when you want to run them against a different browser like Chrome, Safari, or Internet Explorer you quickly run into configuration overhead that can seem overly complex and lacking in good documentation or examples.

## A Brief Primer On Browser Drivers

With the introduction of WebDriver (circa Selenium 2) a lot of benefits were realized (e.g., more effective and faster browser execution, no more single host origin issues, etc). But with it came some architectural and configuration differences that may not be widely known. Namely -- browser drivers.

WebDriver works with each of the major browsers through a browser driver which is (ideally but not always) maintained by the browser manufacturer. It is an executable file (consider it a thin layer or a shim) that acts as a bridge between Selenium and the browser.

Let's step through an example using [ChromeDriver](https://sites.google.com/a/chromium.org/chromedriver/).

## An Example

Before starting, we'll need to download the latest ChromeDriver binary executable for our operating system from [here](http://chromedriver.storage.googleapis.com/index.html) (pick the highest numbered directory) and store the unzipped contents of it in our `vendor` directory.

__NOTE: There is a different ChromeDriver binary for each major operating system. If you're using Windows be sure to use the one that ends with `.exe` and specify it in your configuration. This example was built to run on OSX (which does not have a file extension).__

```text
├── lib
│   ├── config.js
│   └── DriverFactory.js
├── package.json
├── pages
│   ├── BasePage.js
│   ├── DynamicLoadingPage.js
│   └── LoginPage.js
├── test
│   ├── DynamicLoadingTest.js
│   ├── LoginTest.js
│   ├── mocha.opts
│   └── spec_helper.js
└── vendor
    ├── chromedriver
    └── geckodriver
```

In order for Selenium to use this binary we have to make sure it knows where it is. There are two ways to do that. We can either manually add `chromedriver` to our system path, or we can update our system path for the current terminal session automatically in our DriverFactory. Let's go with the latter option (which we're already using for `geckodriver`).

We'll also want to make sure our test suite can run either Firefox or Chrome. To do that, we'll need to make a couple of changes.

First, let's add a `browser` value to our `config.js` file that will check for the existence of a `BROWSER` environment variable. If there isn't one then we will default to `'firefox'`.

```javascript
// filename: lib/config.js
module.exports = {
  baseUrl: process.env.BASE_URL || 'http://the-internet.herokuapp.com',
  browser: process.env.BROWSER || 'firefox',
  viewportSize: { width: 1024, height: 768 } || {
    width: process.env.WIDTH,
    height: process.env.HEIGHT,
  },
}
```

Now to update our Driver Factory to use the browser value and add the vendor directory to the system path.

```javascript
// filename: lib/DriverFactory.js
// ...
class DriverFactory {
// ...
  async build(testName, hasEyesCommands = false) {
    this.testName = testName
    process.env.PATH += path.delimiter + path.join(__dirname, '..', 'vendor')
    this.driver = await new Builder().forBrowser(this.config.browser).build()
    if (hasEyesCommands) this.driver = await this._openEyes()
    return this.driver
  }
// ...
}
```

By leveraging the fact that we have the config settings on `this.config`, we used it to update our browser incantation to grab the browser value (e.g., `.forBrowser(config.browser)`).

Now we can specify Chrome when launching our tests (e.g., `BROWSER=chrome mocha`) or Firefox (e.g., `BROWSER=firefox mocha`).

__NOTE: It's worth noting that this will only be reasonably performant since the browser driver is being executed before and after every test. There are alternative ways to set this up, but this is good enough to see where our tests fall down in Chrome (and it will not be the primary way we will run our tests a majority of the time anyway -- more on that later in the book).__

## Additional Browsers

A similar approach can be applied to other browser drivers, with the only real limitation being the operating system you're running. But remember -- __no two browser drivers are alike__. Be sure to check out the documentation for the browser you care about to find out the specific requirements:

+ [ChromeDriver](https://github.com/seleniumhq/selenium/wiki/ChromeDriver)
+ [EdgeDriver](https://developer.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/platform/documentation/dev-guide/tools/webdriver/)
+ [FirefoxDriver](https://github.com/seleniumhq/selenium/wiki/FirefoxDriver)
+ [InternetExplorerDriver](https://github.com/seleniumhq/selenium/wiki/InternetExplorerDriver)
+ [SafariDriver](https://webkit.org/blog/6900/webdriver-support-in-safari-10/)

