# Selenium In A Nutshell

Selenium is a software robot sent from the future to help us test web applications. But keep in mind that it's not one of those fancy shape-shifting robots than can run really fast. It's more like one of those really strong robots that's not very fast and is best suited for accomplishing a certain objective.

That is to say -- Selenium is really good at a specific set of things. If you know what those are and stick to them then you can easily write reliable, scalable, and maintainable tests that you and your team can trust.

## What Selenium Is and Is Not Good At

Selenium is built to automate browsers, specifically human interaction with them. Things like navigating to pages, clicking on elements, typing text into input fields, etc.

It's less ideal for checking lower-level functionality like HTTP status codes or HTTP headers. While you can use Selenium this way, it requires additional setup of a third-party tool (e.g., a proxy server like [BrowserMob Proxy](http://bmp.lightbody.net/)), and it is a slippery slope since there are numerous edge cases to consider at this level.

## Selenium Highlights

Selenium works on every major browser, with a number of major programming languages, and on every major operating system. Each language binding and browser are actively being developed to stay current. Yes, even Internet Explorer (thanks to [Jim Evans](https://twitter.com/jimevansmusic)!). And more recently the Selenium project has seen official support [from Microsoft for their Edge browser](https://blogs.windows.com/msedgedev/2015/07/23/bringing-automated-testing-to-microsoft-edge-through-webdriver/#DkIEUSOxbQpfruhz.97) and [from Apple with the latest version of Safari](https://webkit.org/blog/6900/webdriver-support-in-safari-10/).

Selenium can be run on your local computer, on a server (with Selenium Remote), on your own set of servers (with Selenium Grid), or on a third-party cloud provider (like [Sauce Labs](http://saucelabs.com/)). As your test suite grows, your test runs will take longer to complete. To speed them up you will want to run them in parallel, which is where the benefit of having your own servers or using a cloud provider comes in -- that, and the ability to have numerous browser and operating system combinations to run your tests on.

One of the guiding philosophies of Selenium is to be able to write your tests once and run them across multiple browsers. While this is a rosy proposition, it's not entirely accurate. There are plenty of gotchas to watch out for when you get into it. But don't worry, We'll step through these in detail throughout the book.
