# A Programming Primer

This section will prime you with just enough programming concepts (and how they pertain to Selenium) so you have some working knowledge and a vocabulary. This will help you more effectively comprehend what you will see throughout this book (and in your work afterwards).

Don't get too hung up on the details though. If something doesn't make sense it should once we dig into the full examples in the following chapters. Consider this more of a glossary than a code school.

## Installation

Installing [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/) is pretty straight-forward. There are installer packages available for Mac and Windows operating systems on [the Node.js download page](https://nodejs.org/en/download/). And there are binary distributions for various Linux distributions as well ([link](https://github.com/nodesource/distributions)).

If you're running on a Mac and you want to use [Homebrew](http://brew.sh/), then be sure to check out [this write-up from Treehouse](http://blog.teamtreehouse.com/install-node-js-npm-mac).

## Installing Third-Party Libraries

There are over 250,000 third-party libraries (a.k.a. "packages") available for Node.js through [`npm`](https://docs.npmjs.com/getting-started/what-is-npm). `npm` is the Node Package Manager program that comes bundled with Node.

You can search for packages from [npmjs.com](https://www.npmjs.com/). You don't need an account. Simply type into the search field at the top of the page and press Enter.

To install packages with it you type `npm install package-name` from the command-line. You can install a package globally using the `-g` flag. And you can auto-save the package to a local manifest file (e.g., `package.json`) which explicitly states the package name and version you are using with the `--save` flag.

Here is a list of the libraries we will be working with in this book:

- [selenium-webdriver](https://www.npmjs.com/package/selenium-webdriver)
- [mocha](https://www.npmjs.com/package/mocha)
- [grunt](https://www.npmjs.com/package/grunt)
- [grunt-parallel](https://www.npmjs.com/package/grunt-parallel)
- [grunt-shell](https://www.npmjs.com/package/grunt-shell)

## Interactive Prompt

Node.js comes with an interactive prompt (a.k.a. a [REPL](https://nodejs.org/api/repl.html) (record-eval-print loop)).

Just type `node` from the command-line. It will load a simple prompt that looks like this:

```text
>
```

In this prompt you can type out Node.js code. It will evaluate it and return the result. As you step through this chapter it will serve as a great place to practice the commands and concepts you will see.

When you're done, just type `.exit`.

## Choosing A Text Editor

In order to write Node.js code, you will need to use a text editor. Some popular ones are [Vim](http://www.vim.org/), [Emacs](http://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/), and [Sublime Text](http://www.sublimetext.com/).

There's also the option of going for an IDE (Integrated Development Environment) like [WebStorm](https://www.jetbrains.com/webstorm/). It's not free, but there is a free 30-day trial.

It's important to pick an editor that works for you and makes you productive. So if you're new to programming and text editors then it's probably best to go with something more intuitive like Sublime Text or WebStorm. If you end up using WebStorm be sure to check out the documentation on using it with Mocha ([link](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/webstorm/2016.2/running-mocha-unit-tests.html?search=mocha)).

## Programming Concepts In A Nutshell

Programming can be a deep and intimidating rabbit hole if you're new to it. But don't worry. When it comes to automated browser testing there is only a small subset of programming that we really need to know in order to get started. Granted, the more you know, the better off you'll be. But you don't need to know a whole lot in order to be effective right now.

Of all the programming concepts out there, here are the ones you'll need to pay attention right now:

+ Object Structures (Variables, Methods, and Classes)
+ Scope
+ Types of Objects (Strings, Integers, Data Structures, Booleans, etc.)
+ Actions (Assertions and Conditionals)
+ Inheritance
+ Promises

Let's step through each and how they pertain to testing with Selenium.

### Object Structures

<u>Variables</u>

Variables are places to store and retrieve values of various types (e.g., Strings, Integers, etc. -- more on these later). Variables are created and then referenced by their name.

A variable name:

+ is prepended with the word `var`
+ can be one or more words in length
+ starts with a letter
+ is not case sensitive
+ should not be a keyword or reserved word in JavaScript

Since variable names are not case sensitive there are various ways you can write them (e.g., `camelCase`, `PascalCase`, `snake_case`). The general guidance across various style guides is to use `camelCase`.

You can store things in variables by using an equals sign (`=`) after their name. In Node.js, a variable takes on the type of the value you store in it (more on object types later).

```text
> var exampleVariable = "42";
> Object.prototype.toString.call(exampleVariable);
// outputs: '[object String]'

> var exampleVariable = 42;
> Object.prototype.toString.call(exampleVariable);
// outputs: '[object Number]'
```

__NOTE: In the above example `Object.prototype.toString.call(exampleVariable)` is used to find the object's type since there is no straight-forward way to get the object's type directly from the variable.__

In Selenium, a common example of a variable is when we need to store an element (or the value from an element) in the beginning of a test to be referenced later. For example, getting a page's title.

```javascript
var pageTitle = driver.getTitle();
```

__NOTE: `driver` is the variable we will use to interact with Selenium throughout the book. More on that later.__

<u>Methods</u>

Throughout our tests we'll want to group common actions together for easy reuse. We do this by placing them into methods.

Method names follow the same rules as variables. The biggest differences between method and variable names are that method names tend to be a verb (since they denote some kind of an action to be performed), we use a function call when declaring them, and the contents of the method are wrapped in opening and closing brackets (e.g., `{}`).

```javascript
var example_method = function() {
  // your code
  // goes here
};

example_method();
```

Additionally, we can specify arguments we want to pass into the method when calling it (a.k.a. specifying a parameter).

```text
> var say = function(message) {
... console.log(message);
... };
> say('Hello World!');
// outputs: Hello World!
```

We can also specify a default value to use if no argument is provided.

```text
> var say = function(message = 'Hello World!') {
... console.log(message);
... };
> say();
// outputs: Hello World!
> say('something else');
// outputs: something else
```

We'll see something like this used when we tell Selenium how to wait for things on the page to load (more on that in Chapter 10).

<u>Classes</u>

Classes are a useful way to represent concepts that will be reused numerous times in multiple places. They can contain variables and methods. To declare a class you specify the keyword `function` followed by the name you want.

__NOTE: In JavaScript there is no such thing as a class. But there are functions (which are objects that can contain behavior and state) that you can use to create something very similar to a class. The word "class" will be used throughout the book as a function which has been adapted to behave like a class.__

Class names:

+ start with a capital letter
+ should be PascalCase for multiple words (e.g., `ExampleClass`)
+ should be descriptive (e.g., a noun, whereas methods should be a verb)

You first have to define the class. Then you can specify methods and variables for it. Method declarations in classes are done with `ClassName.prototype.methodName`. After that you can create an instance of the class (a.k.a. instantiation) to use it. Once you have an instance of it you can access the methods within it to trigger the behavior stored in them.

__NOTE: The function block used to declare a class is a method in it's own right. It is considered a "constructor method". This is a method that gets automatically executed when a new instance of the class is created.__

```text
> function Messenger() {
... };
> Messenger.prototype.say = function(message) {
... console.log(message);
... };
> var messenger = new Messenger();
> messenger.say('This is an instance of a class');
// outputs: This is an instance of a class
```

An example of this in Selenium is the representation of a web page -- also known as a 'Page Object'. In it you will store the page's elements and behavior that we want to interact with.

```javascript
var LOGIN_FORM = {id: 'login'};
var USERNAME_INPUT = {id: 'username'};
var PASSWORD_INPUT = {id: 'password'};

function LoginPage(driver) {
}

LoginPage.prototype.with = function(username, password) {
// ...
```

The variables that are fully capitalized and separated by underscores (e.g., `_`) are called constants. They are variables that are unlikely to change. And the values in curly brackets (`{}`) are called object literals. They are simply a key/value pair.

## Scope

Now that we have our different object structures it's worth briefly covering how they can and cannot access one another. The easiest way to do this is by discussing the different types of variables you are likely to run into.

### Local Variables

Local variables enable you to store and retrieve values from within a confined area (this is no different than what was described in the variables section earlier). A variable that was declared within a method is a classic example of this. It is useful within the method it was declared, but inaccessible outside of it.

### Class Variables

Variables declared in a module (a.k.a. a class) will enable you to store and retrieve values more broadly (e.g., both inside and outside of methods). Essentially any variable that is declared outside of a function will be available throughout the entire class.

A common example you will see throughout the book is the usage of locators in page objects. These variables represent pieces of a web page we want to interact with. By storing them as broadly scoped variables we will be able to use them throughout an entire page object.

### Global Variables

There are a few built-in global functions in Node.js. One of them is a `global` variable. Things stored in this variable are accessible across modules (e.g., throughout all of our test code).

We will use this sparingly to clean up our test code.

For more information on Global Variables, you can check out the Node.js documentation for them [here](https://nodejs.org/api/globals.html#globals_global).

### Environment Variables

Environment variables are a way to pass information into our program from outside of it. They are also another way to make a value globally accessible (e.g., across an entire program, or set of programs). They can be set and retrieved from within your code by:

+ using the `process.env` lookup function
+ specifying the environment variable name with it

Environment variables are often used to retrieve configuration values that could change. A great example of this is the base URL and browser name we'll use in our tests.

```javascript
module.exports = {
  baseUrl: process.env.BASE_URL || 'http://the-internet.herokuapp.com',
  browser: process.env.BROWSER || 'firefox'
};
```

### Types of Objects

<u>Strings</u>

Strings are alpha-numeric characters packed together (e.g., letters, numbers, and most special characters) surrounded by either single (`'`) or double (`"`) quotes. Typically single-quotes.

You'll run into Strings when working with copy on a page (e.g., pulling a page's URL, title, or h1 tag to determine if your test is in the right place before proceeding).

<u>Numbers</u>

If you have a test that needs to pull some values from a page and add/subtract/multiply/divide them, then this will come in handy. Although you may need to convert the values from a String to an Number first. But don't sweat it, this is a trivial thing to do in JavaScript.

```javascript
Number("42")
// outputs: 42
```

<u>Collections</u>

Collections enable you to gather a set of data for later use. In JavaScript there are two common collection types -- arrays and object literals. The one we'll want to pay attention to is object literals.

Object literals are an unordered set of data stored in key/value pairs. The keys are unique and are used to look up the data in the object.

```text
> var example = {this: 'that', the: 'other'}
> example.this
// outputs: 'that'
> example.the
// outputs: 'other'
```

You'll end up working with object literals in your Page Objects to store and retrieve your page's locators.

```javascript
var LOGIN_FORM = {id: 'login'};
var USERNAME_INPUT = {id: 'username'};
var PASSWORD_INPUT = {id: 'password'};
var SUBMIT_BUTTON = {css: 'button'};
```

<u>Booleans</u>

Booleans are binary values that are returned when asking a question of your code. They are what enable us to complete assertions.

There are numerous ways to ask questions. Some involve various [comparison operators](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Comparison_Operators) (e.g., `==`, `===`, `!=`, `<`, `>`). The response is either `true` or `false`.

```text
> 2+2 === 4
// outputs: true
```

Selenium also has commands that return a boolean result when we ask questions of the page we're testing.

```javascript
element.isDisplayed();
// returns true if the element is on the page and visible
```

### Actions

A benefit of booleans is that we can use them to perform an assertion.

<u>Assertions</u>

Assertions are made against booleans and result in either a passing or failing test. In order to leverage assertions we will need to use an assertion library (e.g., [the one built into Node.js](https://nodejs.org/api/all.html#assert_assert) or any of [the assertion libraries Mocha supports](http://mochajs.org/#assertions)). For the examples in this book we will be using the assertion library that comes with Node.js.

```text
> var assert = require('assert');
> assert(2+2 === 5, 'incorrect')
// outputs: AssertionError: incorrect
```

For assertions in our Selenium tests we'll need to deal with Promises (more on them soon). Basically, we'll ask Selenium something about the page, expecting either a `true` or a `false` response. But it won't give it to use immediately. Instead we need to wait for the result and assert on that.

```javascript
    driver.findElement({css: '.flash.success'}).isDisplayed().then(function(elementDisplayed) {
      assert.equal(elementDisplayed, true, 'Success message not displayed');
    });
```

If this is the only assertion in your test then this will result in a passing test. More on this and other good test writing practices in Chapter 5.

<u>Conditionals</u>

Conditionals work with booleans as well. They enable you execute different code paths based on their values.

The most common conditionals in JavaScript are `if`, `else if`, and `else` statements.

```javascript
var number = 10;
if (number > 10) {
  console.log('The number is greater than 10');
} else if (number < 10) {
  console.log('The number is less than 10');
} else if (number === 10) {
  consle.log('The number is 10');
} else {
  console.log('I don't know what the number is.');
};
// outputs: The number is 10
```

You'll end up using conditionals in your test setup code to determine which browser to load based on a configuration value. Or whether or not to run your tests locally or somewhere else.

```javascript
  } else if (config.host === 'localhost') {
    if (config.browser === 'chrome') {
      var vendorDirectory = process.cwd() + '/vendor';
      process.env.PATH = vendorDirectory + ":$PATH";
    }
    builder = new webdriver.Builder().forBrowser(config.browser);
```

More on that in chapters 12 and 13.

### Inheritance

Classes have the ability to connect to one-another through parent/child inheritance. By having a single parent class we can store common actions in methods that can be made readily available to all child classes.

Inheritance in JavaScript can be established by:

+ importing the parent class (when in another file)
+ calling the parent class constructor from the child class constructor
+ setting the child's `prototype` value to the parent's
+ setting the child's `prototype.constructor` to itself

```javascript
function Parent() {
  this.hairColor = 'brown';
};

function Child() {
  Parent.call(this);
};

Child.prototype = Object.create(Parent.prototype);
Child.prototype.constructor = Child;

var child = new Child();
console.log(child.hairColor);
// outputs: brown
```

You'll see this in your tests when writing all of the common Selenium actions you intend to use into methods in a parent class. Inheriting this class will allow you to call these methods in your child classes (more on this in Chapter 9).

### Promises

Test execution with Selenium is a fundamentally synchronous activity (e.g., visiting a page, typing text input a field, submitting the form, and waiting for the response). But JavaScript execution is inherently asynchronous, meaning that it will not wait for a command to finish executing before proceeding onto the next one. It will just keep going and the executed commands will eventually complete and return a result (a.k.a. a callback). Left unchecked it's obviously a non-starter for automated functional testing.

To account for this we enlist the help of Promises. Promises represent the result of each asynchronous action and can act as a blocking function that will wait for them to complete. Each promise comes in one of three states -- pending, fulfilled, or rejected. Thankfully, built into the Selenium Node.js bindings is a Promise handler that takes care of most of this for us (a.k.a. [ControlFlow](http://seleniumhq.github.io/selenium/docs/api/javascript/module/selenium-webdriver/lib/promise_exports_ControlFlow.html)). So out of the box we get the appearance of a fairly synchronous test-writing experience by just using the built-in Selenium API functionality that is consistent across all of the language bindings.

However, there are some circumstances where we'll need to modify the Promise handler in our test code. More on that in chapters 8 and 9.

## Additional Resources

Here are some additional resources that can help you continue your JavaScript/Node.js learning journey.

+ [codecademy JavaScript course](https://www.codecademy.com/learn/javascript)
+ [Node.js Tutorals for Beginners (videos)](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL6gx4Cwl9DGBMdkKFn3HasZnnAqVjzHn_)
+ [NodeSchool](http://nodeschool.io/)
+ [Introduction to Object Oriented JavaScript](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Introduction_to_Object-Oriented_JavaScript)
+ [JavaScript: The Good Parts (book)](https://www.amazon.com/JavaScript-Good-Parts-Douglas-Crockford/dp/0596517742)


