# Writing Your First Test

Fundamentally, Selenium works with two pieces of information -- the element on a page you want to use and what you want to do with it. This one-two punch will be repeated over and over until you achieve the outcome you want in your application -- at which point you will perform an assertion to confirm that the result is what you intended.

Let's take logging in to a website as an example. With Selenium you would:

1. Visit the login page of a site
2. Find the login form's username field and input the username
3. Find the login form's password field and input the password
4. Find the submit button and click it

Selenium is able to find and interact with elements on a page by way of various locator strategies. The list includes (sorted alphabetically):

+ Class
+ CSS Selector
+ ID
+ Link Text
+ Name
+ Partial Link Text
+ Tag Name
+ XPath

While each serves a purpose, you only need to know a few to start writing effective tests.

## How To Find Locators

The simplest way to find locators is to inspect the elements on a page. The best way to do this is from within your web browser. Fortunately, popular browsers come pre-loaded with development tools that make this simple to accomplish.

When viewing the page, __right-click__ on the element you want to interact with and click __Inspect Element__. This will bring up a small window with all of the markup for the page but zoomed into your highlighted selection. From here you can see if there are unique or descriptive attributes you can work with.

## How To Find Quality Elements

You want to find an element that is __unique__, __descriptive__, and __unlikely to change__.

Ripe candidates for this are `id` and `class` attributes. Whereas text (e.g., the text of a link) is less ideal since it is more apt to change. This may not hold true for when you make assertions, but it's a good goal to strive for.

If the elements you are attempting to work with don't have unique `id` or `class` attributes directly on them, look at the element that houses them (a.k.a. the parent element). Oftentimes the parent element has a unique element that you can use to start with and walk down to the child element you want to use.

When you can't find any unique elements have a conversation with your development team letting them know what you are trying to accomplish. It's typically a trivial thing for them to add helpful semantic markup to a page to make it more testable. This is especially true when they know the use case you're trying to automate. The alternative can be a lengthy and painful process which will probably yield working test code but it will be brittle and hard to maintain.

Once you've identified the target elements for your test, you need to craft a locator using one Selenium's strategies.

## An Example

### Part 1: Find The Elements And Write The Test

Here's the markup for a standard login form (pulled from [the login example on the-internet](http://the-internet.herokuapp.com/login)).

```html
<form name="login" id="login" action="/authenticate" method="post">
   <div class="row">
    <div class="large-6 small-12 columns">
      <label for="username">Username</label>
      <input type="text" name="username" id="username">
    </div>
  </div>
  <div class="row">
    <div class="large-6 small-12 columns">
      <label for="password">Password</label>
      <input type="password" name="password" id="password">
    </div>
  </div>
    <button class="radius" type="submit"><i class="icon-2x icon-signin"> Login</i></button>
</form>
```

Note the unique elements on the form. The username input field has a unique `id`, as does the password input field. The submit button doesn't, but it's the only button on the page so we can easily find it and click it.

Let's put these elements to use in our first test. First we'll need to create a new folder called `tests` in the root of our project directory. In it we'll create a new test file called `login_test.py` and a requisite Python file for the directory called `__init__.py`. We'll also need to create a `vendor` directory for third-party files and download [`geckodriver`](https://github.com/mozilla/geckodriver) into it (you can grab the latest release from [here](https://github.com/mozilla/geckodriver/releases/latest)). This is a required file (known as a browser driver) in order to make Selenium work with Firefox 48 and newer. See [Chapter 12](#chapter12) for more detail about browser drivers.

When we're done our directory structure should look like this.

```text
└── tests
    ├── __init__.py
    └── login_test.py
└── vendor
    └── geckodriver
```

And here is the code we will add to the test file for our Selenium commands, locators, etc.

```python
# filename: tests/login_test.py
import pytest
from selenium import webdriver
from selenium.webdriver.common.by import By


class TestLogin():

    @pytest.fixture
    def driver(self, request):
        _geckodriver = os.path.join(os.getcwd(), 'vendor', 'geckodriver')
        driver_ = webdriver.Firefox(executable_path=_geckodriver)

        def quit():
            driver_.quit()

        request.addfinalizer(quit)
        return driver_


    def test_valid_credentials(self, driver):
        driver.get("http://the-internet.herokuapp.com/login")
        driver.find_element(By.ID, "username").send_keys("tomsmith")
        driver.find_element(By.ID, "password").send_keys("SuperSecretPassword!")
        driver.find_element(By.CSS_SELECTOR, "button").click()
```

After importing the requisite classes for pytest and Selenium we declare a test class (e.g., `class TestLogin()`). We then declare a method within the class called `driver`. At the top of the method we add a decorator to denote that this is a fixture (e.g., `pytest.fixture`). By default fixture methods in pytest are called around each test method. So we'll use this to setup and teardown our instance of Selenium.

To create an instance of Selenium we call `webdriver.Firefox()` and store it in a variable. Since the name of the method is `driver`, we refer to this variable as `driver_`. This variable gets returned at the end of the method which will get used in our test (more on that soon). In order for this to work we need to provide the path to the `geckodriver` file, which we do by finding it and storing it in a local variable called `_geckodriver` at at the top of the method.

__NOTE: If you are testing on an older version of Firefox (e.g., 47 or earlier) then you don't need to download `geckodriver`. You will be able to use the legacy FirefoxDriver implementation. To do that you just need to disable Marionette (the new Firefox WebDriver implementation that geckodriver connects to) which would look like this: `driver\_ = webdriver.Firefox(capabilities={'marionette': False})`__


The `driver` method has two parameters, `self` and `request`. `self` is a required parameter for class methods, `request` is a parameter made available to fixtures. It enables access to loads of things during a test run. For now, the relevant piece is the ability to call `request.addfinalizer`. Actions passed to `addfinalizer` get executed after a test method completes. So we're calling `driver_.quit()` and passing it into the `addfinalizer` method.

Our test method starts with the word `test_` (that's how pytest knows it's a test) and it has two parameters (`self` and `driver`). `driver` is our access to the fixture method created at the top of the class. Since it returns a browser instance we can reference this variable directory to use Selenium commands. In this test we're visiting the login page by its URL (with `driver.get()`), finding the input fields by their ID (with `driver.find_element(By.ID, "username")`), inputting text into them (with `.send_keys()`), and submitting the form by clicking the submit button (e.g., `By.CSSSELECTOR("button")).click()`).

If we save this and run it (by running `py.test` from the command-line), it will run and pass. But there's one thing missing -- an assertion. In order to find an element to write an assertion against we need to see what the markup of the page is after submitting the login form.

### Part 2: Figure Out What To Assert

Here is the markup that renders on the page after logging in.

```html
<div class="row">
  <div id="flash-messages" class="large-12 columns">
    <div data-alert="" id="flash" class="flash success">
      You logged into a secure area!
      <a href="#" class="close">x</a>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div id="content" class="large-12 columns">
  <div class="example">
    <h2><i class="icon-lock"></i> Secure Area</h2>
    <h4 class="subheader">Welcome to the Secure Area. When you are done click logout below.</h4>
    <a class="button secondary radius" href="/logout"><i class="icon-2x icon-signout"> Logout</i></a>
  </div>
</div>
```

There are a couple of elements we can use for our assertion in this markup. There's the flash message class (most appealing), the logout button (appealing), or the copy from either the `h2` or the flash message (least appealing).

Since the flash message class name is descriptive, denotes a successful login, and is less likely to change than the copy, let's go with that.

```html
class="flash success"
```

When we try to access an element like this (e.g., with a multi-worded class) we will need to use a CSS selector or an XPath.

_NOTE: Both CSS selectors and XPath can work well, but the examples throughout this book will focus on how to use CSS selectors._

## A Quick Primer on CSS Selectors

In web design CSS (Cascading Style Sheets) are used to apply styles to the markup (HTML) on a page. CSS is able to do this by declaring which bits of the markup it wants to alter through the use of selectors. Selenium operates in a similar manner but instead of changing the style of elements, it interacts with them by clicking, getting values, typing, sending keys, etc.

CSS selectors are a pretty straightforward and handy way to write locators, especially for hard to reach elements.

For right now, here's what you need to know. In CSS, class names start with a dot (`.`). For classes with multiple words, put a dot in front of __each__ word, and remove the space between them (e.g., `.flash.success` for `class='flash success'`).

For a good resource on CSS Selectors I encourage you to check out [Sauce Labs' write up on them](https://saucelabs.com/resources/selenium/css-selectors).

### Part 3: Write The Assertion And Verify It

Now that we have our locator, let's add an assertion that uses it.

```python
# filename: tests/login_test.py
#  ...
    def test_valid_credentials(self, driver):
        driver.get("http://the-internet.herokuapp.com/login")
        driver.find_element(By.ID, "username").send_keys("tomsmith")
        driver.find_element(By.ID, "password").send_keys("SuperSecretPassword!")
        driver.find_element(By.CSS_SELECTOR, "button").click()
        assert driver.find_element(By.CSS_SELECTOR, ".flash.success").is_displayed()
```

With `assert` we are checking for a `true` Boolean response. If one is not received the test will fail. With Selenium we are seeing if the success message element is displayed on the page (with `.is_displayed`). This Selenium command returns a Boolean. So if the element is rendered on the page and is visible (e.g., not hidden or covered up by an overlay), `true` will be returned, and our test will pass.

But we're not done yet. Unfortunately if we run this it would fail due to [a documented bug in `geckodriver`](https://github.com/mozilla/geckodriver/issues/308). Clicking the submit button triggers a new page to load and under normal circumstances Selenium would automatically wait for this new page to load before looking for the `.flash.success` element. As of right now this automatic wait is not observed which will cause Selenium to inadvertently look for an element that hasn't appeared yet. To account for this, we'll need to add a brief delay into our test.

```python
# filename: tests/login_test.py
import pytest
from selenium import webdriver
from selenium.webdriver.common.by import By
import time
# ...
    def test_valid_credentials(self, driver):
        # ...
        time.sleep(1)
        assert driver.find_element(By.CSS_SELECTOR, ".flash.success").is_displayed()
```

__NOTE: Adding a hard-coded sleep (even for just `1` second) is NOT a recommended practice. There are MUCH better ways to make your test wait. They'll be covered in [Chapter 10](#chapter10) where we'll also revisit this code and improve upon it to remove this hard-coded sleep.__

When we save this and run it (e.g., `py.test` from the command-line) it will run and pass just like before, but now there is an assertion which will catch a failure if something is amiss.

### Just To Make Sure

Just to make certain that this test is doing what we think it should, let's change the locator in the assertion to attempt to __force a failure__ and run it again. A simple fudging of the locator will suffice.

```python
        assert driver.find_element(By.CSS_SELECTOR, ".flash.successasdf").is_displayed()

```

If it fails then we can feel reasonably confident that the test is doing what we expect and we can change the assertion back to normal before committing our code.

This trick will save you more trouble that you know. Practice it often.
