# Writing Really Re-usable Test Code

In the previous chapter we stepped through creating a simple page object to capture the behavior of the page we were interacting with. While this was a good start, it leaves some room for improvement.

As our test suite grows and we add more page objects we will start to see common behavior that we will want to use over and over again throughout our suite. If we leave this unchecked we will end up with duplicative code which will slowly make our page objects harder to maintain. 

Right now we are using Selenium actions directly in our page object. While on the face of it this may seem fine, it has some long term impacts, like:

+ slower page object creation due to the lack of a simple Domain Specific Language (DSL)
+ test maintenance issues when the Selenium API changes (e.g., major changes between Selenium RC and Selenium WebDriver)
+ the inability to swap out the driver for your tests (e.g., mobile, REST, etc.)

With a Base Page Object (a.k.a. a facade layer) we can easily side step these concerns by abstracting all of our common actions into a central class and leveraging it in our page objects.

## An Example

Let's step through an example with our login page object.

### Part 1: Create The Base Page Object

First let's create the base page object by adding a file called `BasePage.js` to the `pages` directory.

```text
├── package.json
├── pages
│   ├── BasePage.js
│   └── LoginPage.js
└── test
    └── LoginTest.js
```

Next let's populate the file.

```javascript
// filename: pages/BasePage.js
'use strict';

var driver;

function BasePage(driver) {
  this.driver = driver;
}

BasePage.prototype.visit = function(url) {
  this.driver.get(url);
};

BasePage.prototype.find = function(locator) {
  return this.driver.findElement(locator);
};

BasePage.prototype.click = function(locator) {
  this.find(locator).click();
};

BasePage.prototype.type = function(locator, inputText) {
  this.find(locator).sendKeys(inputText);
};

BasePage.prototype.isDisplayed = function(locator) {
  return this.find(locator).isDisplayed();
};

module.exports = BasePage;
```

After declaring the class by specifying the constructor (e.g., `function BasePage(driver) {`) we receive and store an instance of Selenium just like in our Login page object. But what's different here is the methods that come after the constructor (e.g., `visit`, `find`, `click`, `type`, and `isDisplayed`). Each one stores a specific behavior we've used in our tests. Some of the names are the same as you've seen in Selenium, others renamed (for improved readability).

Now that we have all of our Selenium actions in one place, let's update our login page object to leverage this facade.

```javascript
// filename: pages/LoginPage.js
'use strict';
var BasePage = require('./BasePage');
var assert = require('assert');

var LOGIN_FORM = {id: 'login'};
var USERNAME_INPUT = {id: 'username'};
var PASSWORD_INPUT = {id: 'password'};
var SUBMIT_BUTTON = {css: 'button'};
var SUCCESS_MESSAGE = {css: '.flash.success'};
var FAILURE_MESSAGE = {css: '.flash.error'};

function LoginPage(driver) {
  BasePage.call(this, driver);
  this.visit('http://the-internet.herokuapp.com/login');
  this.isDisplayed(LOGIN_FORM).then(function(elementDisplayed) {
    assert.equal(elementDisplayed, true, 'Login form not loaded');
  });
}

LoginPage.prototype = Object.create(BasePage.prototype);
LoginPage.prototype.constructor = LoginPage;

LoginPage.prototype.with = function(username, password) {
  this.type(USERNAME_INPUT, username);
  this.type(PASSWORD_INPUT, password);
  this.click(SUBMIT_BUTTON);
};

LoginPage.prototype.successMessagePresent = function() {
  return this.isDisplayed(SUCCESS_MESSAGE);
};

LoginPage.prototype.failureMessagePresent = function() {
  return this.isDisplayed(FAILURE_MESSAGE);
};

module.exports = LoginPage;
```

Two fundamental things have changed in our Login page object. We've established inheritance between `BasePage` and `LoginPage`, and we've swapped out all of our Selenium commands with the methods we created in `BasePage`. 

Inheritance isn't straight-forward in JavaScript since the notion of classes is not really concrete. There are three pieces to it. With `LoginPage.prototype = Object.create(BasePage.prototype);` we are setting the type of this class to `BasePage`. With `Login.prototype.constructor = LoginPage;` we are making sure that the `LoginPage` constructor is still called when we create a new instance of this class. And in the constructor, we are calling the constructor in `BasePage` before we do anything else. Effectively, this means that `LoginPage` is now a child of `BasePage`, which is what enables us to swap out all of the Selenium actions to use the methods we just specified in `BasePage`.

If we save everything and run our tests they will run and pass just like before. But now our page objects are more readable, simpler to write, and easier to maintain and extend.

### Part 2: Add Some Error Handling

Remember in the previous chapter when we ran into an error with Selenium when we looked for an element that wasn't on the page? Let's address that now.

To recap -- here's the error message we saw:

```sh
NoSuchElementError: Unable to locate element: {"method":"css selector","selector":".flash.success"}
```

The important thing to note is the name of the exception Selenium offered up -- `NoSuchElementError`. Let's modify the `isDisplayed` method in our base page object to handle it.

```javascript
// filename: pages/BasePage.js
'use strict';

var driver,
    Promise = require('selenium-webdriver').promise;
// ...
BasePage.prototype.isDisplayed = function(locator) {
  var defer = Promise.defer();
  this.find(locator).isDisplayed().then(function(isDisplayed) {
    defer.fulfill(isDisplayed);
  }, function(error) {
    if (error.name === 'NoSuchElementError') {
      defer.fulfill(false);
    } else {
      defer.reject(error);
    }
  });
  return defer.promise;
};
```

Since JavaScript is asynchronous we can't rely on something like a `try`/`catch` to handle our Selenium exceptions. Instead we need to leverage the promise handler that's built into the Selenium bindings and manually take control of it when doing an `isDisplayed` lookup.

First we require the promise class and store it in a `Promise` variable. Rather than declare `var` for it we leverage a short-hand by using a comma and specifying it on a new line, tacking it onto the `var` declaration for `driver`.

Next we call `Promise.defer();` in the `isDisplayed` method (storing it in a local variable). This tells Selenium that we're going to manually step through a promise. We then update `this.find(locator).isDisplayed()` to start the promise with a variable that represents it (e.g., `.then(function(isDisplayed) {`). If no exception is thrown then we consider the promise "fulfilled", specifying it with `defer.fulfill(isDisplayed)`.

What comes next is the error callback (e.g., `}, function(error) {`). When an exception is thrown this is where we'll handle it. In the callback we have access to the error that was thrown, so we can check its name and determine the return response based on it. So when the error name is `NoSuchElementError` (e.g., `if (error.name === 'NoSuchElementError')`) we can fulfill the promise with `false` (e.g., `defer.fulfill(false);`) instead of throwing the exception. This ensures that we only return `false` on this specific exception since we want all other exceptions to get thrown normally. We handle all other exceptions in the `else` case of our conditional by calling `defer.reject(error);`.

At the end of the method we make sure to return the promise (e.g., `return defer.promise;`). This makes sure that the caller (e.g., any page object that uses the `isDisplayed` method) gets a promise that it can use regardless if an exception was thrown or not.

With this new handling in place, let's revisit our `'with invalid credentials'` login test and alter it so it checks to see if the success message is not present (which would normally trigger a `NoSuchElementException` exception) to make sure things work as we expect.

```javascript
// filename: test/LoginTest.js
//  ...
  test.it('with invalid credentials', function() {
    login.successMessagePresent().then(function(elementDisplayed) {
      assert.equal(elementDisplayed, false, "Success message displayed");
    });
  });
});

```

When we save our changes and run this test it will run and pass without throwing an exception.
