# Running A Different Browser Locally

It's straightforward to get your tests running locally against Firefox (that's what we've been doing up until now). But when you want to run them against a different browser like Chrome, Safari, or Internet Explorer you quickly run into configuration overhead that can seem overly complex and lacking in good documentation or examples.

## A Brief Primer On Browser Drivers

With the introduction of WebDriver (circa Selenium 2) a lot of benefits were realized (e.g., more effective and faster browser execution, no more single host origin issues, etc). But with it came some architectural and configuration differences that may not be widely known. Namely -- browser drivers.

WebDriver works with each of the major browsers through a browser driver which is (ideally but not always) maintained by the browser manufacturer. It is an executable file (consider it a thin layer or a shim) that acts as a bridge between Selenium and the browser.

Let's step through an example using [ChromeDriver](https://sites.google.com/a/chromium.org/chromedriver/).

## An Example

Before starting, we'll need to download the latest ChromeDriver binary executable for our operating system from [here](http://chromedriver.storage.googleapis.com/index.html) (pick the highest numbered directory) and store the unzipped contents of it somewhere. The simplest thing to do is create a new folder for it (and other things like it) in our test code.

Let's create a `Vendor` in the root of our project and place the ChromeDriver binary file there.

```text
├── App.config
├── PageObjects
│   ├── BasePage.cs
│   ├── DynamicLoadingPage.cs
│   └── LoginPage.cs
├── Tests
│   ├── BaseTest.cs
│   ├── DynamicLoadingTest.cs
│   └── LoginTest.cs
├── Vendor
│   └── chromedriver.exe
└── packages.config
```

In order for Selenium to use this binary we have to make sure it knows where it is. There are two ways to do that. We can add `chromedriver.exe` to the path of our system, or we can pass in the path to `chromedriver.exe` file when configuring Selenium. For simplicity, let's go with the latter option.

__NOTE: There is a different ChromeDriver binary for each major operating system. If you're using OSX be sure to use the one that ends doesn't have a file extension and specify it (e.g., `chromedriver`) in your configuration. This example was built to run on Windows (which has a file extension of `.exe`).__

We'll also want to make sure our test suite can run either Firefox or Chrome. To do that, we'll need to make a couple of changes.

First, let's add a `BrowserName` key/value pair to our App.config.

```csharp
<!-- filename: App.config -->
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<configuration>
  <appSettings>
    <add key="ApplicationBaseUrl" value ="https://the-internet.herokuapp.com"/>
    <add key="BrowserName" value="Chrome"/>
  </appSettings>
</configuration>
```

Now to update the Selenium setup in our base test.

```csharp
// filename: Tests/BaseTest.cs
// ...
    class BaseTest
    {
        protected IWebDriver Driver;
        public static string ApplicationBaseUrl;
        private static string BrowserName;
        private static string VendorDirectory;

        private void LoadConfigValues()
        {
            var configReader    = new AppSettingsReader();
            BrowserName         = (string)configReader.GetValue("BrowserName", typeof(string));
            ApplicationBaseUrl  = (string)configReader.GetValue("ApplicationBaseUrl", typeof(string));
            VendorDirectory     = System.IO.Directory.GetParent(
                                  System.IO.Path.GetDirectoryName(
                                  typeof(Tests.BaseTest).Assembly.Location)).
                                  Parent.FullName + @"\Vendor";
        }
```

After creating field variables for both the browser name and the vendor directory we update the `LoadConfigValues` private method to populate them. Fetching the `BrowserName` is straightforward. We're doing the same thing that we did for `ApplicationBaseUrl` and just providing the new key. For the vendor directory we're looking up the full path to the root of the test directory (by way of looking up the assembly location for the base test and its parent directory) and appending `\Vendor` with a string literal (e.g., `@`). This gives us the full path to the `Vendor` directory.

Now to modify the `SetUp` method.

```csharp
// filename: Tests/BaseTest.cs
        [SetUp]
        protected void SetUp()
        {
            LoadConfigValues();
            switch (BrowserName.ToLower())
            {
                case "firefox":
                    Driver = new FirefoxDriver();
                    break;
                case "chrome":
                    Driver = new ChromeDriver(VendorDirectory);
                    break;
            }
        }
```

In `SetUp` we're performing a conditional check against the `BrowserName` field variable (after we set it to lower-case letters for consistency). When the value is set to `"firefox"` we run the tests just like before. And when its set to `"chrome"` we create a new instance of ChromeDriver and pass it `VendorDirectory` (e.g., `Driver = new ChromeDriver(VendorDirectory);`). You don't need to specify the filename for the ChromeDriver, Selenium will find it on its own with the vendor directory.

Now we can specify Chrome as our browser in App.config and have our tests run in it.

It's worth noting that this will only be reasonably performant since it is launching and terminating the ChromeDriver binary executable before and after every test. There are alternative ways to set this up, but this is good enough to see where our tests fall down in Chrome (and it will not be the primary way we will run our tests a majority of the time anyway -- more on that later in the book).

## Additional Browsers

A similar approach can be applied to other browser drivers, with the only real limitation being the operating system you're running. But remember -- __no two browser drivers are alike__. Be sure to check out the documentation for the browser you care about to find out the specific requirements:

+ [ChromeDriver](https://github.com/seleniumhq/selenium/wiki/ChromeDriver)
+ [EdgeDriver](http://se.tips/edge-driver)
+ [FirefoxDriver](https://github.com/seleniumhq/selenium/wiki/FirefoxDriver)
+ [InternetExplorer Driver](https://github.com/seleniumhq/selenium/wiki/InternetExplorerDriver)
+ [SafariDriver](https://github.com/seleniumhq/selenium/wiki/SafariDriver)


