# Speeding Up Your Test Runs

We've made huge strides by leveraging page objects, a base page object, explicit waits, and connecting our tests to Sauce Labs. But we're not done yet. Our tests still take a good deal of time to run since they're executing in series (e.g., one after another). As our suite grows this slowness will grow with it.

With parallelization we can easily remedy this pain before it becomes acute by executing multiple tests at the same time. Unfortunately in the Node.js ecosystem there are few current and supported parallel execution libraries for Mocha that will work with the official JavaScript Selenium bindings.

Thankfully, with [`grunt`](http://gruntjs.com/) and some plugins for it (e.g., [`grunt-parallel`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/grunt-parallel) and [`grunt-shell`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/grunt-shell)) we can set up a workable solution.

## Configuration

First we need to install the additional libraries we need. So let's update our `package.json` file and use `npm install` to install them.

```javascript
// filename: package.json
{
  "name": "selenium-guidebook-examples",
  "dependencies": {
    "grunt": "^1.0.1",
    "grunt-parallel": "^0.5.1",
    "grunt-shell": "^1.3.0",
    "mocha": "2.5.3",
    "selenium-webdriver": "2.53.3"
  }
}
```

__NOTE: Alternatively we could have installed the library and have our package.json file auto-updated by using `npm install package-name --save`.__

Now we have access to Grunt and these supporting libraries. Grunt requires the use of a `Gruntfile.js` file. This is where we'll configure our parallel execution. In the beginning of the file we'll want to grab a collection of the test files and clean it up a bit.

```javascript
// filename: Gruntfile.js
'use strict';

module.exports = function (grunt) {
    var testFiles = grunt.file.expand('test/*.js');
    testFiles.shift();
    testFiles = testFiles.map(function(testFile) {
      return testFile.replace(/test\//, '');
    });
// ...
```

With `grunt.file.expand` we can provide a pattern to match for, which we use to grab all of the JavaScript files in the test directory (e.g., `'test/*.js'`). We used `.shift()` to remove the first entry which is `test/BaseTest.js` (since it's alphabetical). We then iterate over the collection and remove `test/` from each result. This way we're left with just the filenames (e.g., `LoginTest.js`, `DynamicLoadingTest.js`, etc.).

Now to specify the shell execution command we want Grunt to use, and specify all of the parallel tasks we want.

```javascript
// filename: Gruntfile.js
    grunt.initConfig({
      shell: {
        runTests: {
          command: function(testFile) {
            return 'mocha test/'+testFile+'';
          }
        }
      },
      parallel: {
        assets: {
          options: {
            grunt: true
          },
          tasks: testFiles
        }
      }
    });
// ...
```

Within `grunt.initConfig` we configure the core of what we need. Under `shell` we create a `runTests` task that will execute a command that will launch a specific test file (which accepts a test file name as an argument). Under `parallel` we pass in the collection of `testFiles` to denote that we want a task for each test file to be executed in parallel.

Now onto loading and registering these tasks to tie everything together.

```javascript
// filename: Gruntfile.js
// ...
    grunt.loadNpmTasks('grunt-parallel');
    grunt.loadNpmTasks('grunt-shell');
    grunt.registerTask('default', ['parallel']);

    testFiles.forEach(function(testFile) {
        grunt.registerTask(testFile, ['shell:runTests:'+testFile+'']);
    });
};
```

For the `shell` and `parallel` tasks to work we need to first load `grunt-parallel` and `grunt-shell`, which we accomplish with the `grunt.loadNpmTasks` commands. Next we iterate over the collection of test files and register a task for each. Each time specifying a shell command to run (which passes the filename to the shell command).

When we save this file we can now launch our tests using Grunt (e.g., `grunt` from the command-line) and our tests will execute in parallel.

__NOTE: If you're using Sauce Labs you'll have a concurrency limit (e.g., number of available concurrent virtual machines you can use). It's listed on the My Account page in the [Account Dashboard](https://saucelabs.com/account). This number will be the limiter to how many parallel tests you can run at once. The general recommendation is to limit the number of processes for your test runs to equal the concurrency limit. This solution does not support that. But Sauce Labs will queue the excess sessions that you throw at it and make sure that they get executed once other tests of yours finish.__

## Random Order Execution

When enabling parallel execution in your tests you may start to see odd, inconsistent behavior that is hard to track down.

This is often due to dependencies between tests that you didn't know were there. A great way to expose these kinds of issues and ensure your tests are ready for prime time is to execute them in a random order. This also has the added benefit of exercising the application you're testing in a random order (which could unearth previously unnoticed bugs).

This is functionality which is still being built for Mocha, so it's not available yet. But you can follow along with its progress [here](https://github.com/mochajs/mocha/issues/902).
