# Simple Command-line Test Execution

> "Am I the only Ruby dev who writes rake tasks for everything? Don't want to worry about the syntax of 50 different cmds or which dir I'm in." [[source]](https://twitter.com/russolsen/status/428227153377779713)  

> -- [Russ Olsen](http://russolsen.com/) (author of [Eloquent Ruby](http://www.amazon.com/Eloquent-Ruby-Addison-Wesley-Professional/dp/0321584104) and [Design Patterns in Ruby](http://www.amazon.com/Design-Patterns-Ruby-Russ-Olsen/dp/0321490452))

There's a lot to remember every time we want to run our tests now. So let's clean things up with some Rake tasks.

[Rake](https://github.com/ruby/rake) is a library in Ruby that enables us to easily capture and run repetitive tasks. To set it up, we just need to install the gem, add a `Rakefile` in our root directory, and add our tasks to the `Rakefile`. Then all we have to do is run our tasks using `rake` from the command-line.

Let's step through an example.

## An Example

### Part 1: Setup 

First we'll want to add Rake to our `Gemfile` and install it (with `bundle install`).

```ruby
# filename: Gemfile
source 'https://rubygems.org'

gem 'rspec', '~> 3.5.0'
gem 'selenium-webdriver', '3.0.3'
gem 'sauce_whisk', '~> 0.0.21'
gem 'parallel_tests', '~> 2.10.0'
gem 'rake', '~> 11.3.0'
```

Next, let's create a `Rakefile` with some initial tasks.

```ruby
# filename: Rakefile
def launch_with(config_filename)
  system("parallel_rspec --test-options '-r ./config/#{config_filename} --order random' spec")
end

desc 'Run tests locally'
task :local, :browser do |t, args|
  ENV['browser'] = args[:browser]
  launch_with('local.rb')
end

desc "Run tests in Sauce Labs"
task :cloud do
  launch_with('cloud.rb')
end
```

Notice that this looks similar to a standard Ruby file. We are declaring a method, do some string interpolation in it, referencing that method, and setting some environment variable values. It's the task declaration that's a little bit different (and specific to Rake).

To declare a task, we first want to give it a description. Descriptions are useful since they show up in our task list (next to the command to launch the task). If one is not set, then the task will not appear in the task list. To set one, we use the keyword `desc` and provide a string value (e.g., `'Run tests locally'`).

Once we have that, we can create the task itself. This is done with the keyword `task` followed by the name of the task written as a symbol (e.g., `task :cloud`). The first line of a task ends with the word `do`. This opens up the code block and terminates with the word `end`. Between `do` and `end` is where we place the code for our task.

Our `:local` task is different than the `:cloud` task since we are taking an argument. To accomplish this we specify an additional parameter on the `task` line (e.g., `task :local, :browser`) and some variables in pipes after `do` (e.g., `do |t, args|`). With the `args` variable we are able to receive an argument at run time and pass it into the browser environment variable (e.g., `ENV['browser'] = args[:browser]`).

__NOTE: For more information on Rake, check out [this tutorial](http://jasonseifer.com/2010/04/06/rake-tutorial).__

In our `launch_in_parallel` method we pull out the lengthy command used to run our tests and wrap it in a `system` command to launch it. We also make this method accept an argument for the config file and inject it into the execution string with interpolation. This enables us to use it for each of our rake tasks. It also keeps our tasks clean, removing redundancy, and enables us to easily change our execution string (if we need to add additional arguments).

If we save this file and run `rake -T` from the command-line, we should see a list of our available Rake actions.

```sh
rake cloud           # Run tests in Sauce Labs
rake local[browser]  # Run tests locally
```

To run a task, just type `rake` followed by the task name. For tasks that take an argument, wrap the argument in square-brackets (e.g., `rake local[chrome]`).

If we run either the `cloud` or `local` tasks, they will run our tests in parallel with 2 processes, in a random order, and will pass. But the cloud task will only run the values specified in `config/cloud.rb` or specified in environment variables at run-time. Let's improve our cloud task.

### Part 2: Tasks For The Browsers We Care About

Now that we have Rake tasks we are in a better position to run tests quickly. But in order to make this approach worthwhile, we want to add more tasks to support different browser combinations when running our tests in Sauce Labs.

We can do that pretty easily by replacing our current `:cloud` task with something new. We can specify the browsers we care about in a collection and generate a set of tasks based on that collection. And to make things succinct, we can wrap these tasks in a cloud category (or `namespace`) so they're all helpfully named.

```ruby
# filename: Rakefile
# ...
namespace :cloud do
  BROWSERS_CLOUD =  [ 'firefox', 'chrome', 'internet_explorer']
  BROWSERS_CLOUD.each do |browser|
    desc "Run tests in Sauce Labs on #{browser.capitalize}"
    task browser.to_sym, :version, :os do |t, args|
      ENV['browser'] = browser
      ENV['browser_version']  = args[:version]
      ENV['operating_system'] = args[:os]
      launch_with('cloud.rb')
    end
  end
end
```

In Rake we can group common tasks together with a `namespace`, which follows the same naming conventions as a task. This helps organize our task list, making things more intuitive to run. You'll see what I mean soon.

After specifying each browser we care about as strings in an array, we iterate through the array and create a task based on the browser name (converting it from a string to a symbol). The task accepts two arguments for the browser version and the operating system and passes these values into the appropriate environment variable.

If we run `rake -T` it will display a list of available tasks.

```sh
rake cloud:chrome[version,os]             # Run tests in Sauce Labs on Chrome
rake cloud:firefox[version,os]            # Run tests in Sauce Labs on Firefox
rake cloud:internet_explorer[version,os]  # Run tests in Sauce Labs on Internet_explorer
rake local[browser]                       # Run tests locally
```

To run our tests against Internet Explorer 8, all we have to do now is run `rake cloud:internet_explorer['8','Windows XP']` (notice that there are no spaces around the comma). And for different versions of Internet Explorer, we can easily do it by specifying the various available combinations.

```sh
rake cloud:internet_explorer['6','Windows XP']
rake cloud:internet_explorer['7','Windows XP']
rake cloud:internet_explorer['8','Windows XP']
rake cloud:internet_explorer['8','Windows 7']
rake cloud:internet_explorer['9','Windows 7']
rake cloud:internet_explorer['10','Windows 7']
rake cloud:internet_explorer['10','Windows 8']
```

__NOTE: If we try for a browser version and operating system combination that's not valid in Sauce Labs, we'll receive an error message from Sauce Labs stating 'Unsupported OS/browser/version combo'.__

### Part 3: A Small Bit of Clean-up

Let's apply the same configuration for local execution (replacing our `:local` task).

```ruby
# filename: Rakefile
# ...
namespace :local do
  BROWSERS_LOCAL = [ 'firefox', 'chrome' ]
  BROWSERS_LOCAL.each do |browser|
    desc "Run tests locally on #{browser.capitalize}"
    task browser.to_sym do
      ENV['browser'] = browser
      launch_with('local.rb')
    end
  end
end
# ...
```

Now our task list should look like this.

```sh
rake cloud:chrome[version,os]             # Run tests in Sauce Labs on Chrome
rake cloud:firefox[version,os]            # Run tests in Sauce Labs on Firefox
rake cloud:internet_explorer[version,os]  # Run tests in Sauce Labs on Internet_explorer
rake local:chrome                         # Run tests locally on Chrome
rake local:firefox                        # Run tests locally on Firefox
```

There are over 800 browser/OS combinations to choose from in Sauce Labs (you can see a full list [here](https://saucelabs.com/platforms)), and there are numerous ways to organize your Rake tasks. So if you aren't looking forward to the prospect of remembering and typing out the operating system, browser, or browser version for your test runs, simply create tasks for each of the browser/OS combinations you care about.

That's one of the biggest advantages to having a Rakefile. You can be as explicit as you want, have a central list to see what is available, and can easily run each item on that list.
