# Defining A Test Strategy

A great way to increase your chances of automated web testing success is to first map out a testing strategy. And the best way to do it is to answer these four questions:

1. How does your business make money?  
2. What features of your application are being used?  
3. What browsers are your users using?  
4. What things have broken in the application before?  

Note: for entities that don't deal *directly* in dollars and cents (e.g., non-profits, federal agencies, etc.) you should focus on how the application generates _value_ for the end user.

After answering these questions, you should have an understanding of the functionality and browsers that matter to the application you're testing. This will help you narrow down your efforts to the things that matter most.

This strategy works best for applications with existing functionality and does not speak directly to testing new functionality that's being actively developed. That's not to say that the two couldn't co-exist. It largely depends on your available resources and pace of development. But in order to reach high quality at speed, you first have to go slow.

## What To Do With The Answers

After answering these you should end up with a prioritized backlog of test automation tasks that you can work off of and track progress against.

### Question 1: Money/Value

Every company's application makes money (or generates value) through core functionality that is defined by a series of increasingly-valuable user interactions -- a.k.a. the 'funnel'. Your answers to this question will help you determine what your funnel is.

This will be your highest priority for automation. Start an automation backlog to keep track.

### Question 2: Usage Data

Odds are your application offers a robust set of functionality well beyond the funnel. Your answers to this question will help highlight what it is. And if you're basing these answers on usage data, then it will be broken down from highly used to lightly used. Tack these items onto your automation backlog based on their frequency of use.

### Question 3: Browsers

Now that you know what functionality is business critical and widely adopted by your users, you need to determine what browsers to focus your automated web testing efforts on. Your usage data will tell you this as well. It will help you determine which browsers you can reasonably avoid testing in (e.g., based on non-existent or low usage numbers). Note the top 2 (or 3 depending on your numbers), but focus on the top 1 for now. This is the browser you will start using for automation.

### Question 4: Risky Bits

To round out the strategy it is also best to think about what things have broken in the application before. To answer this question it's best to check your defect/bug tracker (if you have one) and to ask around your team. What you end up with may read like a laundry list of browser specific issues or functionality that has been flaky or forgotten about in the past.

Be sure to check this list against your automation backlog. If it's not there, add it to the bottom of the backlog. If it is there, make a note in the backlog item that this has been an issue in the past.

If the issue has happened numerous times and has the potential to occur again, move that backlog item up in priority. And if issues keep cropping up that are related to a specific browser, compare this browser to your short list from question #3. If it's a browser that's not in your list but it's still important (e.g., a small pocket of users), track it on the backlog, but put it at the bottom.

## Now You Are Ready

Having answered these questions, you should now have a prioritized backlog of critical business functionality, a short list of browsers to focus on, and an understanding of the risky parts of your application to watch out for. With it, you should be able to make sure you are on the right track -- focusing on things that matter for the business and its users.
