# Picking A Language

In order to work well with Selenium, you need to choose a programming language to write your acceptance tests in. Conventional wisdom will tell you to choose the same language as what the application is written in. That way if you get stuck you can ask the developers on your team for help. But if you're not proficient in this language (or new to development), then your progress will be slow and you'll likely end up asking for more developer help than they have time for -- hindering your automation efforts and setting you up for failure.

A great way to determine which language to go with is to answer one simple question: __Who will own the automated tests?__

The answer to this, and the discussion that unfolds from it, will help you more effectively choose a programming language.

## What To Do With The Answer

If you're a tester (or a team of testers) and you will be building and maintaining the test automation, then it's best to consider what languages you (and your team) already have experience with, or are interested in gaining experience with, rather than what the application is built in. Your Selenium tests __DO NOT__ have to be written in the same language as the application you are testing. Have a discussion with your team to see what interests them and go from there.

If you're a developer who is working on the application and just looking to add automated acceptance testing to the mix, then it makes sense to continue with the same language.

## Some Additional Food For Thought

As your suite of tests grows you will find the need to add functionality to make things easier to use, run faster, offer better reporting, etc. When this happens you will effectively be doing two jobs, no longer just writing automated tests but also growing a framework (a.k.a. a test harness).

As you are considering which language to go with, consider what open source frameworks already exist for the languages you are eyeing. Going with one will save you a lot of time and give you a host of functionality out of the box that you would otherwise have to build and maintain yourself -- and it's FREE.

You can find a short list of open source Selenium WebDriver frameworks and their respective languages [here](http://davehaeffner.com/resources/selenium-frameworks/).

## Outro

Choosing a programming language for automated testing is not a decision that should be taken lightly. If you're just starting out (or looking to port your tests) then considering and discussing these things will help position you for greater success.

With all that being said, the rest of this book will show you how to build your own framework (in addition to writing well factored tests) in Java.
