# Writing Resilient Test Code

Ideally, you should be able to write your tests once and run them across all supported browsers. While this is a rosy proposition, there is some work to make this a reliable success. And sometimes there may be a hack or two involved. But the lengths you must go really depends on the browsers you care about and the functionality you're dealing with in your application.

By using high quality locators we're already in good shape, but there are still some issues to deal with. Most notably... timing. This is especially true when working with dynamic, JavaScript heavy pages (which is more the rule than the exception in a majority of web applications you'll deal with).

But there is a simple approach that makes up the bedrock of reliable and resilient Selenium tests -- and that's how you wait and interact with elements. Gone are the days of waiting for the page to finish loading, or hard-coding sleeps, or doing a blanket wait time (a.k.a. an implicit wait). Nay. Now are the wonder years of waiting for an expected outcome to occur for a set amount of time. If the outcome occurs before the amount of time specified, then the test will proceed. Otherwise, it will wait the full amount of time specified.

We accomplish this through the use of __explicit waits__.

## An Example

Let's step through an example that demonstrates this against [a dynamic page on the-internet](http://the-internet.herokuapp.com/dynamic_loading/1). The functionality is pretty simple -- there is a button. When you click it a loading bar appears for 5 seconds, then disappears, and gets replaced with the text 'Hello World!'.

### Part 1: Create A New Page Object And Update The Base Page Object

Let's start by looking at the markup on the page.

```html
<div class="example">
  <h3>Dynamically Loaded Page Elements</h3>
  <h4>Example 1: Element on page that is hidden</h4>

  <br>

  <div id="start">
    <button>Start</button>
  </div>

  <div id="finish" style="display:none">
    <h4>Hello World!</h4>
  </div>

</div>
```

At a glance it's simple enough to tell that there are unique `id` attributes that we can use to reference the start button and finish text.

Let's add a page object for Dynamic Loading.

```ruby
# filename: dynamic_loading.rb
require_relative 'base_page'

class DynamicLoading < BasePage

  START_BUTTON  = { css: '#start button' }
  FINISH_TEXT   = { id: 'finish' }

  def initialize(driver)
    super
    visit 'http://the-internet.herokuapp.com/dynamic_loading/1'
  end

  def start
    click START_BUTTON
  end

  def finish_text_present?
    wait_for(10) { is_displayed? FINISH_TEXT }
  end

end
```

At the top of the file we require our base page object and set up inheritance when declaring our class so we get our common Selenium actions. After that we wire up our locators in constants, add a visit action to our `initialize` method, and drop in some methods to start the loading process and to see if the finish text is present.

In `finish_text_present?` we are using a method which has not been added to our base page object yet. So let's hop into our base page object and add it to the bottom of the class.

```ruby
# filename: base_page.rb
# ...
  def wait_for(seconds = 15)
    Selenium::WebDriver::Wait.new(timeout: seconds).until { yield }
  end

end
```

`wait_for` is where we are defining our explicit wait. In it we are accepting an integer for the number of seconds we'd like to wait. If nothing is provided, 15 seconds will be used. We then use this value to tell the explicit wait function that Selenium offers how long to wait, and what to wait for. By using a `yield` we are able to easily pass in a code block to run (e.g., a Selenium command surrounded by brackets (`{}`)).

## More On Explicit Waits

It's important to set a reasonably sized default timeout for the explicit wait. But you want to be careful not to make it too high. Otherwise you run into a lot of the same timing issues you get from implicit waits. But set it too low and your tests will be brittle, forcing you to run down transient issues.

In our page object when we're using `wait_for(10) { is_displayed? FINISH_TEXT }` we are telling Selenium to to see if the finish text is displayed on the page. It will keep trying until it either returns `true` or reaches ten seconds -- whichever comes first.

If the behavior on the page takes longer than we expect (e.g., due to slow load times, or a feature change), we can simply adjust this one wait time to fix the test rather than increase a blanket wait time (which impacts every test). And since it's dynamic, it won't always take the full amount of time to complete.

### Part 2: Write A Test To Use The New Page Object

Now that we have our page object and requisite base page methods we can wire up a new test to use it.

```ruby
# filename: dynamic_loading_spec.rb
require_relative 'dynamic_loading'

describe 'Dynamic Loading' do

  before(:each) do
    @driver = Selenium::WebDriver.for :firefox
    @dynamic_loading = DynamicLoading.new(@driver)
  end

  after(:each) do
    @driver.quit
  end

  it 'Example 1: Hidden Element' do
    @dynamic_loading.start
    expect(@dynamic_loading.finish_text_present?).to eql true
  end

end
```

When we run it (e.g., `rspec dynamic_loading_page.rb` from the command-line) it will visit the page, click the start button, wait for the text to appear, assert the text appeared, and close the browser.

### Part 3: Update Page Object And Add A New Test

Let's step through one more dynamic page example to see if our explicit wait approach holds up.

[This example](http://the-internet.herokuapp.com/dynamic_loading/2) is laid out similarly to the last one, the main difference is that it will render the final result __after__ the progress bar completes. Here's the markup for it.

```html
<div class="example">
  <h3>Dynamically Loaded Page Elements</h3>
  <h4>Example 2: Element rendered after the fact</h4>

  <br>

  <div id="start">
    <button>Start</button>
  </div>

  <br>
</div>
```

In order to find the selector for the finish text element we need to inspect the page after the loading bar sequence finishes. Here's what it looks like.

```html
<div id="finish" style=""><h4>Hello World!</h4></div>
```

Before we add our test we need to modify our page object to accommodate visiting the different example URLs.

```ruby
# filename: dynamic_loading.rb
require_relative 'base_page'

class DynamicLoading < BasePage

  START_BUTTON  = { css: '#start button' }
  FINISH_TEXT   = { id: 'finish' }

  def example(example_number)
    visit "http://the-internet.herokuapp.com/dynamic_loading/#{example_number}"
  end

  def start
    click START_BUTTON
  end

  def finish_text_present?
    wait_for(10) { is_displayed? FINISH_TEXT }
  end

end
```

We're able to remove the `initialize` method entirely since we no longer need the `visit` action as part of loading the page object. That functionality now lives in the `example` method. Thanks to inheritance our parent class is still able to do what it needs, even without the use of an `initialize` in the child class.

Now that we have that sorted, let's add a new test to reference the markup shown above (and update our existing test to use the new `.example` method).

```ruby
# filename: dynamic_loading_spec.rb
require_relative 'dynamic_loading'

describe 'Dynamic Loading' do

  before(:each) do
    @driver = Selenium::WebDriver.for :firefox
    @dynamic_loading = DynamicLoading.new(@driver)
  end

  after(:each) do
    @driver.quit
  end

  it 'Example 1: Hidden Element' do
    @dynamic_loading.example 1
    @dynamic_loading.start
    expect(@dynamic_loading.finish_text_present?).to eql true
  end

  it 'Example 2: Rendered after the fact' do
    @dynamic_loading.example 2
    @dynamic_loading.start
    expect(@dynamic_loading.finish_text_present?).to eql true
  end

end

```

When we run these tests (`rspec dynamic_loading_spec.rb` from the command-line) we can see that the explicit wait approach works for when the element is on the page but hidden and when it's rendered after the fact.

## Revisiting Login

Now that we have an explicit wait helper method available to us, let's revisit the login page object and refactor it to remove the hard-coded sleep.

```ruby
# filename: login.rb
# ...
  def with(username, password)
    type username, USERNAME_INPUT
    type password, PASSWORD_INPUT
    click SUBMIT_BUTTON
  end

  def success_message_present?
    wait_for(1) { is_displayed? SUCCESS_MESSAGE }
    is_displayed? SUCCESS_MESSAGE
  end

  def failure_message_present?
    wait_for(1) { is_displayed? FAILURE_MESSAGE }
    is_displayed? FAILURE_MESSAGE
  end

end
```

By using calls to `is_displayed?` from `success_message_present?` and `failure_message_present?` we are able to remove the `sleep(1)` call in the `with` method in favor of an explicit wait. This will cause Selenium to wait up to `1` second for the correct element to be displayed on the page rather than waiting regardless of the state of the page.

## Browser Timing

Using explicit waits gets you pretty far. But there are a few things you'll want to think about when it comes to writing your tests to work against various browsers.

It's simple enough to write your tests locally against Firefox and assume you're all set. But once you start to run things against other browsers, you may be in for a rude awakening. The first thing you're likely to run into is the speed of execution. A lot of your tests will start to fail when you point them at either Chrome or Internet Explorer, and likely for different reasons.

Chrome execution is very fast, so you will see some odd timeout failures. This is an indicator that you need to add explicit waits to parts of your page objects that don't already have them. And the inverse is true when running things against older version of Internet Explorer (e.g., IE 8). This is an indicator that your explicit wait times are not long enough since the browser is taking longer to respond -- so your tests timeout.

The best approach to solve this is an iterative one. Pick a browser you care about and run your tests. Take each failed test, adjust your test code as needed, and run them again. Keep going until they all pass. Repeat for each of the browsers you care about.

Once you're on the other side of these issues, the amount of effort you need to put into it should diminish dramatically.

## Closing Thoughts

By explicitly waiting to complete an action, our tests are in a much more resilient position because Selenium will keep trying for a reasonable amount of time rather than trying just once. And each action can be tuned to meet the needs of each circumstance. Couple that with the dynamic nature of explicit waits, and you have something that will work in a multitude of circumstances -- helping you endure even the toughest of browsers.

This is one of the most important concepts in testing with Selenium. Use explicit waits often.
