# Running A Different Browser Locally

When you want to run your tests against a different browser like Chrome, Safari, or Internet Explorer you quickly run into additional configuration overhead that can start to feel overly complex and lacking in good documentation or examples.

## A Brief Primer On Browser Drivers

With the introduction of WebDriver (circa Selenium 2) a lot of benefits were realized (e.g., more effective and faster browser execution, no more single host origin issues, etc). But with it came some architectural and configuration differences that may not be widely known. Namely -- browser drivers.

WebDriver works with each of the major browsers through a browser driver which is (ideally) maintained by the browser manufacturer. It is an executable file (consider it a thin layer or a shim) that acts as a bridge between Selenium and the browser.

Let's step through an example using [ChromeDriver](https://github.com/seleniumhq/selenium/wiki/ChromeDriver).

## An Example

Before starting we'll need to [grab the latest ChromeDriver binary executable from Google](http://chromedriver.storage.googleapis.com/index.html) and store the unzipped contents of it in our existing `vendor` directory.

```text
├── Gemfile
├── Gemfile.lock
├── config.rb
├── pages
│   ├── base_page.rb
│   ├── dynamic_loading.rb
│   └── login.rb
├── spec
│   ├── dynamic_loading_spec.rb
│   ├── login_spec.rb
│   └── spec_helper.rb
└── vendor
    ├── chromedriver
    └── geckodriver
```

In order for Selenium to use this binary, we have to make sure it knows where it is. There are two ways to do that. We can add the `chromedriver` file to our system path, or pass in the path to the file when launching Selenium. Let's do the latter.

__NOTE: There is a different chromedriver binary for each major operating system. If you're using Windows, be sure to use the one that ends in .exe and specify chromedriver.exe in your configuration. This example was built to run on OSX (which does not have a specified file extension for chromedriver).__

But before we go too far, we want to make it so our test suite can run either Firefox or Chrome. To do that, we need to add a browser environment variable to our 'config.rb' and some conditional logic to `spec_helper.rb`.

```ruby
# filename: config.rb

ENV['base_url'] ||= 'http://the-internet.herokuapp.com'
ENV['browser']  ||= 'firefox'
```

```ruby
# filename: spec/spec_helper.rb

require 'selenium-webdriver'

RSpec.configure do |config|

  config.before(:each) do
    case ENV['browser']
    when 'firefox'
      geckodriver = File.join(Dir.pwd, 'vendor', 'geckodriver')
      @driver = Selenium::WebDriver.for :firefox, driver_path: geckodriver
    when 'chrome'
      chromedriver = File.join(Dir.pwd, 'vendor', 'chromedriver')
      @driver = Selenium::WebDriver.for :chrome, driver_path: chromedriver
    end
  end

  config.after(:each) do
    @driver.quit
  end

end
```

In `config.before(:each)` we're doing a conditional check against the browser environment variable we set in `config.rb` to determine which browser driver to load. For Chrome we are first telling Selenium where the ChromeDriver binary executable is located on disk, and then loading an instance of Selenium for Chrome.

Assuming Chrome is already installed on the system (in a standard location) when we run our tests (specifying Chrome as the browser) -- `browser='chrome' rspec -r ./config.rb`, then we should see them execute in Chrome. If that's not the case for you, then check out [the ChromeDriver documentation site](https://github.com/seleniumhq/selenium/wiki/ChromeDriver) to see if there are additional requirements for your specific system setup.

It's worth noting that this will only be reasonably performant since it is launching and terminating the ChromeDriver binary executable before and after every test. There are alternative approaches we can take, but this is good enough to see where our tests fall down in Chrome (and it will not be the primary way we will run our tests a majority of the time).

## Additional Browsers

A similar approach can be applied to other browser drivers, with the only real limitation being the operating system you're running. But remember, no two browser drivers are alike. Be sure to check out the documentation for the browser you care about to find out it's specific requirements:

+ [ChromeDriver](https://github.com/seleniumhq/selenium/wiki/ChromeDriver)
+ [EdgeDriver](https://developer.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/platform/documentation/dev-guide/tools/webdriver/)
+ [FirefoxDriver](https://github.com/seleniumhq/selenium/wiki/FirefoxDriver)
+ [InternetExplorer Driver](https://github.com/seleniumhq/selenium/wiki/InternetExplorerDriver)
+ [SafariDriver (old)](https://github.com/seleniumhq/selenium/wiki/SafariDriver)
+ [SafariDriver (new)](https://webkit.org/blog/6900/webdriver-support-in-safari-10/)

