# A Programming Primer

This section will prime you with just enough programming concepts (and how they pertain to testing) to get you going so that you have some working knowledge and a vocabulary that will enable you to more effectively comprehend what you will see throughout the remainder of this book and in your work after you put this book down.

Don't get too hung up on the details yet. If something doesn't make sense, it should once we dig into the full examples in the following chapters. Consider this more of a glossary than a code school.

## Installation

Ruby is a quickly-evolving ecosystem. In order to find the latest on how to install Ruby, I encourage you to [check out the official Ruby site's download page](https://www.ruby-lang.org/en/installation/).

That being said, here are some install instructions to help you get started quickly.

+ [Linux](http://davehaeffner.com/selenium-guidebook/install/ruby/linux/)
+ [OSX](http://davehaeffner.com/selenium-guidebook/install/ruby/mac/)
+ [Windows](http://davehaeffner.com/selenium-guidebook/install/ruby/windows/)

If you plan on doing serious development with Ruby, then I would consider using a version manager instead of a direct Ruby installation (e.g., [RVM](http://rvm.io/) or [rbenv](https://github.com/sstephenson/rbenv)). This will enable you to run different versions of Ruby at the same time on your machine as well as have different sets of gems. It's crucial if you plan to work with multiple projects in Ruby that have different dependencies. But it's not required for this book.

## Installing Third-Party Libraries

One of the main benefits of Ruby is that it has a vibrant open source community with copious libraries (a.k.a. "gems") immediately available, making it extremely simple to quickly build complex things. You can find out more information on gems on [the official Ruby site's libraries page](https://www.ruby-lang.org/en/libraries/).

To install a gem, you just have to type `gem install` and the gem name (from your command-line) -- e.g., `gem install selenium-webdriver`.

A helpful library called [Bundler](http://bundler.io/) is a great way to easily manage gems within a project. This is what I use and what was used in building out the examples for this book. All you need to know is that if you see a `Gemfile` in a directory, just run `bundle install` from your terminal window (assuming you have already installed the bundler gem -- `gem install bundler`). When you do, all the necessary gems (and their dependencies) will be installed for you.

## Interactive Prompt

One of the immediate advantages to using a scripting language like Ruby is that you get access to an interactive prompt -- just type `irb` (which stands for interactive ruby shell) from the command-line. It will load a prompt that looks like this:

```sh
irb(main):001:0>
```

In this prompt you can type out Ruby code. It will evaluate it and return the result. As you step through this chapter, it will serve as a great place to practice the commands and concepts you will see.

When you're done, just type `quit`.

## Choosing A Text Editor

In order to write Ruby code, you will need to use a text editor. Some popular ones in the Ruby community are [Vim](http://www.vim.org/), [Emacs](http://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/), and [Sublime Text](http://www.sublimetext.com/).

It's important to pick an editor that works for you and makes you productive. So if you're new to programming and text editors, then it's probably best to go with something more intuitive like Sublime Text.

## Programming Concepts In A Nutshell

Programming can be a deep and intimidating rabbit hole if you're new to it. But don't worry. When it comes to testing there is only a small subset of Ruby that we really need to work with to get started. Granted, the more you know, the better off you'll be. But you don't need to know a whole lot to be an effective test automator right now.

Of all the programming concepts out there, here are the ones you'll need to pay attention to first:

+ Objects Structures (Variables, Methods, and Classes)
+ Scope
+ Object Types (Strings, Numbers, Collections, Booleans)
+ Actions (Assertions, Conditionals, Iteration)
+ Inheritance

Let's step through each and how they pertain to testing with Selenium.

## Object Structures

### Variables

Variables are places to store and retrieve values of various types (e.g., Strings, Integers, Booleans, Collections, etc). Variables are created and referenced with names that:

+ can be one or more words in length
+ use an underbar (`_`) to separate the words (e.g., `example_variable`)
+ start with a lowercase letter
+ are often entirely lowercase

You can place things into them by using an equals sign (`=`). And a variable takes on the type of the value you store in it (more on object types later).

```sh
example_variable = "42"
puts example_variable.class
# outputs: String

example_variable = 42
puts example_variable.class
# outputs: Fixnum
```

In the above example `puts` is used to output a message. This is a common command that is useful for generating output to the terminal.

In Selenium, a common example of a variable is storing an element (or the value from an element) in the beginning of a test to be referenced later. For example, getting a page's title.

```ruby
page_title = @driver.title
```

`@driver` is the variable we will use to interact with Selenium. More on why it uses `@` soon (in Scope).

### Methods

One way to group common actions and behavior for easy reuse is to place them into methods. We define a method with the opening keyword `def`, a name (in the same fashion as a variable), and close it with the keyword `end`. Referencing a method is done the same way as a variable -- by it's name.

```ruby
def example_method
  # your code
  # goes here
end

example_method
```

Additionally, we can specify arguments we want to pass in when calling the method. When setting an argument, we can also set a default value to use if no argument is provided.

```ruby
def say(message = 'Hello World!')
  puts message
end

say
say 'something else'

# outputs:
# Hello World!
# something else
```

We'll see this tactic used in Selenium when we are setting up our explicit wait action (more on that in Chapter 10).

```ruby
def wait_for(seconds=8)
  Selenium::WebDriver::Wait.new(:timeout => seconds).until { yield }
end
```

### Classes

Classes are a useful way to represent concepts that will appear numerous times in multiple places.

They can contain variables and methods, and are defined with the word `class` followed by the name you wish to give it. Class names:

+ must start with a capital letter
+ should be CamelCase for multiple words (e.g., `class ExampleClass`)
+ should be descriptive

You first have to define a class, and then create an instance of it (a.k.a. instantiation) in order to use it. Once you have this instance, you can access the methods within it to trigger an action.

```ruby
class Message
  def say(message = 'Hello World!')
    puts message
  end
end

message_instance = Message.new
message_instance.say 'This is an instance of a class'

# outputs: This is an instance of a class
```

An example of this in Selenium is the representation of a web page -- also known as a 'Page Object'. In it you store the page's elements and behavior.

```ruby
class Login
  LOGIN_FORM  = { id: 'login' }
  USERNAME_INPUT = { id: 'username' }
  PASSWORD_INPUT = { id: 'password' }

  def with(username, password)
...
```

The variables that are fully capitalized are called constants, the values in braces (`{}`) are called hashes, and they are using something called symbols. More on all that soon.

## Scope

Now that we have our different object structures it's worth briefly noting how they can and cannot access one another -- a.k.a. Scope. The easiest way to do this is by discussing the different types of variables you are likely to run into.

### Local Variables

Local variables enable you to store and retrieve values from within a confined area (this is no different than what was described in the variables section earlier). A variable that was declared within a method is a great example of this. It is useful within the method, but inaccessible outside of it.

In your Selenium tests, a local variable will only be available from within the test that it was created.

### Instance Variables

Instance variables enable you to store and retrieve values more broadly -- both inside and outside of methods. They are annotated the same way as regular variables, except that they are prepended with an `@`.

A common example you will see throughout this book is the usage of a `@driver` variable. This is an instance of Selenium. This object is what enables us to control the browser. Storing it as an instance variable enables our test to more easily use it.

### Constants

Constants are for storing information that will not dynamically change. They are easy to spot since they start with a capital letter, and are often all uppercase. They share similarities to instance variables since they can be accessed more broadly.

They are commonly used to store element locator information at the top of Page Objects.

```ruby
class Login

  LOGIN_FORM = { id: 'login' }
  USERNAME_INPUT = { id: 'username' }
  PASSWORD_INPUT = { id: 'password' }
  ...
```

### Global Variables

Global variables are a way to make information available to an entire program. They start with a dollar-sign (`$`) and are created the same way as regular variables.

```ruby
$example_global_variable = 'value you want to make widely available'
```

They are powerful since they are so widely accessible and can be of any type. But they should be used sparingly because there are more intuitive and effective ways to construct your programs.

You will see them used in your tests for rare one-off circumstances when you need to access something that is not available within your current scope and an environment variable has not been set for it either.

### Environment Variables

Environment variables are a way to pass information into Ruby from the command-line. They are also a way to make a value globally accessible (e.g., across an entire program). They can be set and retrieved from within your code by:

+ starting with the keyword `ENV`
+ specifying the name of the variable in brackets (`ENV[]`)
+ surrounding the variable name with single-quotes (`ENV['']`)
+ setting a value for the variable using an equals sign (`ENV['example_variable'] =`)
+ specifying a value to store in the variable with single quotes (`ENV['example_variable'] = 'example value'`)

Environment variables are often used to store configuration values that could change. A great example of this is the base URL for your application.

```ruby
ENV['base_url'] = 'http://the-internet.herokuapp.com'
```

To change the value when running your Ruby application, you just have to specify a new value before the application.

```sh
base_url='http://localhost:4567' ruby example_script.rb
```

## Object Types

### Strings

Strings are alpha-numeric characters strung together (e.g., letters, numbers, and most special characters) surrounded by either single (`'`) or double (`"`) quotes. Single quotes are encouraged unless you intend to manipulate the string value through a tactic called interpolation -- which enables you to inject code into your string to create dynamic output.

```ruby
motd = 'Hello World!'
puts "The message of the day is: #{motd}"

# outputs:
# The message of the day is: Hello World!
```

You'll also want to use double-quotes if you need to have a single quote in your string.

```ruby
puts "How's this?"
```

You'll run into Strings when working with copy on a page (e.g., pulling a page's URL, title, or h1 tag to determine if your test is in the right place before proceeding).

### Numbers

You can do a lot of math in Ruby. The two common types of numbers you will run into with testing are Fixnum (whole numbers or integers) and Float (decimals)

If you have a test that needs to pull some values from a page and add/subtract/multiply/divide/etc them, then this will come in handy. Although, you may need to convert the values from a String to an Fixnum first -- which is trivial to do in Ruby since it is a dynamically typed language.

```ruby
count = @driver.find_elements(css: '#count').text.to_i
# do your comparison or maths with count here
```

The conversion from a String to an Fixnum was done with `.to_i` (the 'i' stands for Integer). If you're working with decimals, you can use `.to_f` to convert it to a Float instead.

### Collections

Collections enable you to gather a set of data for later use.

In Ruby there are two types of built-in collections -- Arrays and Hashes. Array values are stored in an ordered listed, each with an index number (which starts at 0), and are surrounded by square brackets (`[]`). Hashes store values in the order they were added -- but use a key/value pair to store and retrieve data. Hashes are surrounded by braces (`{}`).

Both Arrays and Hashes are able to receive values of any type.

```ruby
# Array Example

an_array = ["one", 2, 3.0, "four"]
puts an_array[0]
puts an_array[1]
puts an_array[2]
puts an_array[3]

# outputs:
# one
# 2
# 3.0
# four
```

Note that in the array we are storing two strings, a fixnum, and a float. And we are accessing each of the values by their index.

You'll end up working with Arrays (or some type of object that is of a similar construct) if you need to test things like HTML data tables, drop-down lists, or if you need to take an action against a specific element within a large list but there are no specific locators for it.

```ruby
# Hash Example

a_hash = {one: "one", two: 2, three: [3]}
puts a_hash[:one]
puts a_hash[:two]
puts a_hash[:three].class

# outputs:
one
2
Array
```

Note that in the hash we are storing a string, a fixnum, and an array. And we are accessing each of the values by their key -- which in this case starts with a colon (`:`). This type of object is known as a Symbol, and it is often used as an identifier in Ruby.

You'll end up working with Hashes and Symbols in your Page Objects to store and retrieve your page's locators.

```ruby
class Login

  LOGIN_FORM = { id: 'login' }
  USERNAME_INPUT = { id: 'username' }
  PASSWORD_INPUT = { id: 'password' }
  ...
```

### Booleans

Booleans are binary values that are returned when asking a question of your code. They are what enable us to complete assertions.

There are numerous ways to ask questions. Some involve various [comparison operators](http://www.tutorialspoint.com/ruby/ruby_operators.htm) (e.g., `==`, `!=`, `<`, `>`, `<=>`), and others end in a question mark (e.g., `include?`). The response is either `true` or `false`.

```ruby
@driver.get 'http://the-internet.herokuapp.com'
@driver.title.include?('The Internet')

# outputs: true
```

## Actions

### Assertions

Assertions are made against booleans and result in either a passing or failing test. In order to leverage assertions we will need to use a testing framework (e.g., [RSpec](http://rspec.info/), [minitest](https://github.com/seattlerb/minitest), or [test-unit](http://www.ruby-doc.org/stdlib-2.1.2/libdoc/test/unit/rdoc/Test/Unit.html)) -- for this book we will be using RSpec.

RSpec enables easy to read assertions through it's [built-in matchers](https://github.com/rspec/rspec-expectations/blob/master/Should.md#using-built-in-matchers). With them, our assertions will start with things like `should`, `should_not`, `should be`, `should include`.

We use these matchers by calling them on the variable we want to ask a question of.

```ruby
@driver.get 'http://the-internet.herokuapp.com'
@driver.title.should include('The Internet')

# or

@driver.get 'http://the-internet.herokuapp.com'
title_boolean = @driver.title.include?('The Internet')
title_boolean.should be_true
```

Both approaches will work, resulting in a passing assertion. If this is the only assertion in your test (more on good test writing practices in Chapter 5), then this will result in a passing test.

### Conditionals

Conditionals work off of booleans as well and enable you to accomplish different things based on context.

The most common conditionals in Ruby are `if` and `case` statements. They both accomplish the same thing. They are just stylistically different approaches (with some minute performance differences). Which approach you end up going with initially is really just a matter of preference.

```ruby
number = 10
if number > 10
  puts 'The number is greater than 10'
elsif number < 10
  puts 'The number is less than 10'
elsif number == 10
  puts 'The number is 10'
else
  puts "I don't know what the number is."
end

# outputs: The number is 10
```

Note that in order to do an else/if statement it is `elsif`, not `elseif`.

```ruby
number = 10
case number
when 11..100
  puts 'The number is greater than 10'
when 0..9
  puts 'The number is less than 10'
when 10
  puts 'The number is 10'
else
  puts "I don't know what the number is."
end
```

You can do `>` and `<` comparisons in a `case` statement as well, but it ends up looking quite a bit like an `if` block -- which takes away from the simplicity of the `case` statement.

You may end up working with Conditionals in your Page Objects. This is more likely if your application has tiered user accounts or if you support older browsers and run into issues with the locators you are using.

### Iteration

Collections wouldn't be nearly as valuable without the ability to iterate over them one at a time. And in Ruby, it's simple to do. The syntax may initially feel awkward, but once you get the hang of it, it is pretty straightforward.

Each collection comes with a set of methods that enables various iterative functionality. The most common one is `.each`. When using it you will need to specify a block of code and a variable.

The variable will be enclosed in pipes (`||`). It represents each piece of the collection and is accessible only within the code block. The code block will open and close with the keywords `do` and `end`. In between the keywords is where you will put the code you want to execute (which will interact with the variable).

```ruby
numbers = [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10]
numbers.each do |number|
  puts number
end

# outputs:
# 1
# 2
# 3
# 4
# 5
# 6
# 7
# 8
# 9
# 10
```

After setting numbers to an array we are able to iterate over it and display each of its values with `puts`.

We can take this approach and couple it with a conditional to influence the output.

```ruby
numbers = [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10]
numbers.each do |number|
  puts number if number > 5
end

# outputs:
# 6
# 7
# 8
# 9
# 10
```

Iteration will come in handy in your Selenium tests if you have to loop over a collection of page elements to interact with them (e.g., HTML data tables, drop-down lists, etc.).

### Inheritance

Classes have the ability to connect to one-another through parent/child inheritance. By having a single parent class we can store common actions in methods that can be readily available to all child classes.

Inheritance is done when declaring a child class by:
+ providing the class name
+ using a less-than symbol (`<`)
+ providing the name of the parent class

```ruby
class Parent
  def hair_color
    puts 'Brown'
  end
end

class Child < Parent
end

child = Child.new
puts child.hair_color

# outputs: Brown
```

You'll see this in your tests when writing all of the common Selenium actions you intend to use into methods in a parent class. Inheriting this class will allow you to call these methods in your child classes (more on this in Chapter 9).

## Additional Resources

If you want to dive deeper into Ruby then I encourage you to check out some of the following resources:

+ [Ruby Monk](https://rubymonk.com/)
+ [Codecademy](http://www.codecademy.com/tracks/ruby)
+ [Learn To Program](http://pragprog.com/book/ltp2/learn-to-program)
+ [The Pick-axe book](http://pragprog.com/book/ruby/programming-ruby)
+ [The Pragmatic Studio's Online Course](http://pragmaticstudio.com/ruby)
