# Anatomy Of A Good Acceptance Test

In order to write acceptance tests that perform well and are both maintainable and resilient there are some simple guidelines to follow:

+ Write atomic and autonomous tests
+ Group similar tests together in small batches
+ Be descriptive
+ Use a Test Framework
+ Store tests in a Version Control System

### Atomic & Autonomous Tests

Each test needs to be concise (e.g., testing a single feature rather than multiple features) and capable of being run independently (e.g., sets up its own data rather than relying on a previous test to do it). Doing this may require a mental shift, discipline, and more up front effort. But __it will make a dramatic impact on the quality, effectiveness, and maintainability of your tests__.

### Grouping Tests

As your test suite grows you should have multiple test files, each containing a small grouping of tests broken out by functionality that they're exercising. This will go a long way towards organization and maintenance as your test suite grows -- as well as faster execution times (depending on your approach to parallelization).

### Being Descriptive

Each test file should be named appropriately, and each test within it should have an informative name (even if it may be a bit verbose). Also, each test (or grouping of tests) should be tagged with some helpful information to provide context and enable more flexible test execution (more on Tagging in Chapter 16).

This way all or part of your test suite can be run, and the results will be informative thanks to helpful naming.

This approach is useful for both humans and robots alike. It enables developers to run a subset of tests to exercise functionality they just modified (as part of their pre-check-in testing) while also enabling you to wire your suite up to a Continuous Integration server for fast and dynamic feedback that's fully automated (more on this in Chapter 16).

### Test Framework

At the heart of every test suite is some kind of a test framework that does a lot of the heavy lifting (e.g., assertions, test group execution, easy global configuration for setup and teardown, reporting, etc.). Rather than reinvent the wheel, you can use one of the many that already exists (there's more than one for every programming language). And with it you can bolt on third party libraries to extend its functionality if there's something missing.

The examples in this book use [RSpec](http://rspec.info/), a popular open source Behavior Driven Development testing framework for Ruby.

### Version Control

In order to effectively collaborate with other testers and developers, your test code must live in a version control system of some sort. Look to see what your development team uses and add your code to it. Otherwise, set up one of the following:

+ [Git](http://git-scm.com/)
+ [Mercurial](http://mercurial.selenic.com/)
+ [Subversion](http://subversion.apache.org/)

Keep in mind that your test code can live in a __separate__ repository from the code of the application you're testing. Combining them may be advantageous, but if all you're doing is writing and running tests against web endpoints (which is a majority of what your testing will be with Selenium) then leaving your test code in a separate repository is a fine way to go.
