# Writing Really Re-usable Test Code

In the previous chapter we stepped through creating a simple page object to capture the behavior of the page we were interacting with. While this was a good start, it leaves a lot of room for improvement.

As our test suite grows and we add more page objects, we will start to see common behavior that we will want to use over and over again. If we leave this unchecked we will end up with duplicative code which will slowly make our test suite harder to maintain. And right now we are using Selenium actions directly in our page object. While on the face of it this may seem fine, it has some long term impacts, like:

+ the inability to drive your tests with a different driver (e.g., mobile)
+ test maintenance issues when Selenium actions change (e.g., major upgrades ala RC to WebDriver)
+ slower test writing due to the lack of a simple Domain Specific Language (DSL)

With a Base Page Object (a.k.a. a facade layer) we can easily side step these concerns by abstracting all of our common actions into a central location and leverage them in our page objects.

Let's step through an example with our login page object.

## An Example

### Part 1: Create The Base Page Object

First we will need to create the base page object.

```ruby
# filename: base_page.rb

require 'selenium-webdriver'

class BasePage

  def initialize(driver)
    @driver = driver
  end

  def visit(url_path)
    @driver.get ENV['base_url'] + url_path
  end

  def find(locator)
    @driver.find_element locator
  end

  def type(text, locator)
    find(locator).send_keys text
  end

  def submit(locator)
    find(locator).submit
  end

  def is_displayed?(locator)
    find(locator).displayed?
  end

end
```

We first `require` our Selenium library (`selenium-webdriver`). By placing it in this file, we will no longer need to include it anywhere else in our test suite (assuming all of our tests leverage page objects). And it makes sense to have it live here since this is the only file where we will be referencing Selenium commands directly.

Next we declare our class and name it appropriately with camel-casing (`BasePage`).

In our `initialize` method we are accepting a driver object as an argument and setting it as an instance variable to make it available throughout this class. We then add common methods that we will reference in our page objects -- `visit`, `find`, `type`, `submit`, and `is_displayed?`.

Now let's update our login page object to leverage this.

```ruby
# filename: login.rb

require_relative 'base_page'

class Login < BasePage

  LOGIN_FORM  = { id: 'login' }
    USERNAME_INPUT = { id: 'username' }
    PASSWORD_INPUT = { id: 'password' }
  SUCCESS_MESSAGE = { css: '.flash.success' }
  FAILURE_MESSAGE = { css: '.flash.error' }

  def initialize(driver)
    super
    visit '/login'
    is_displayed?(LOGIN_FORM).should == true
  end

  def with(username, password)
    type username, USERNAME_INPUT
    type password, PASSWORD_INPUT
    submit LOGIN_FORM
  end

  def success_message_present?
    is_displayed? SUCCESS_MESSAGE
  end

  def failure_message_present?
    is_displayed? FAILURE_MESSAGE
  end

end
```

In order to use the base page object we need to do two things. First we need to include the file, which is handled using the `require_relative` at the top of the file. And second, we need to connect them using inheritance (which is handled in the class declaration with the `<` operator). This is effectively saying `Login` is a child of `BasePage`. Or, `BasePage` is the parent of `Login`. This enables us to freely reference the methods we created in the base page object.

As a result of this refactoring, our `initialize` method changes a bit. Rather than setting the driver object as an instance variable, we are calling `super`. This is a built-in keyword in Ruby for class inheritance. It triggers a method of the same name to be run from the parent class. So in this case, `initialize` from `BasePage` gets run, which is responsible for handling the driver object retrieval and instance variable creation. And since the `BasePage` is now the only place where we reference Selenium actions directly, it stands that it should be the only place where we need to reference a `@driver` object. After that, we load the page and perform an assertion. And since our base URL is being leveraged in the base page object, we don't have to reference it here in our page object.

To finish things off, we replace all of the remaining driver incantations with calls to the methods we created in the base page object. Our tests remain unchanged, but our page objects are more flexible and readable.

Running our tests (`rspec login_spec.rb` from the command-line) should still yield a passing result.

### Part 2: Add Some Error Handling

Remember in the previous chapter when we ran into an error with Selenium when we looked for an element that wasn't on the page? Let's address that now.

To recap -- here's the error message we saw:

```sh
.F

Failures:

  1) Login failed
     Failure/Error: @login.success_message_present?.should be_false
     Selenium::WebDriver::Error::NoSuchElementError:
       Unable to locate element: {"method":"css selector","selector":".flash.success"}
     # [remote server] file:///tmp/webdriver-profile20140125-21003-3brprw/extensions/fxdriver@googlecode.com/components/driver_component.js:8860:in `FirefoxDriver.prototype.findElementInternal_'
     # [remote server] file:///tmp/webdriver-profile20140125-21003-3brprw/extensions/fxdriver@googlecode.com/components/driver_component.js:8869:in `FirefoxDriver.prototype.findElement'
     # [remote server] file:///tmp/webdriver-profile20140125-21003-3brprw/extensions/fxdriver@googlecode.com/components/command_processor.js:10831:in `DelayedCommand.prototype.executeInternal_/h'
     # [remote server] file:///tmp/webdriver-profile20140125-21003-3brprw/extensions/fxdriver@googlecode.com/components/command_processor.js:10836:in `DelayedCommand.prototype.executeInternal_'
     # [remote server] file:///tmp/webdriver-profile20140125-21003-3brprw/extensions/fxdriver@googlecode.com/components/command_processor.js:10778:in `DelayedCommand.prototype.execute/<'
     # ./code_examples/07/02/login.rb:21:in `success_message_present?'
     # ./code_examples/07/02/login_spec.rb:23:in `block (2 levels) in <top (required)>'

Finished in 12.08 seconds
2 examples, 1 failure
```

The important thing to note is the specific error message Selenium offered up -- the part that comes just before the line that says 'Unable to locate element'. We're interested in `Selenium::WebDriver::Error::NoSuchElementError`. With it we can make our code return a `false` boolean instead of failing.

Now that we have it, let's update the `is_displayed?` method in our base page object to use it.

```ruby
# filename: base_page.rb

require 'selenium-webdriver'

class BasePage

...

def is_displayed?(locator)
  begin
    find(locator).displayed?
  rescue Selenium::WebDriver::Error::NoSuchElementError
    false
  end

end
```

In Ruby, we can make our code more resilient by wrapping an action in a `begin`/`rescue` block. In this case, we're wrapping our check to see if an element is displayed. If the element is not on the page, Selenium will raise an error. When that happens, our code will now rescue for that specific error condition, and return false instead of failing the test.

Now if we wanted to see if an element was not on the page, we can, without fear of our test blowing up.

Just to verify, let's revisit our failed login test and update it to assert that the success message isn't present.

```ruby
# filename: login_spec.rb

require_relative 'login'

describe 'Login' do
...

  it 'failed' do
    @login.with('asdf', 'asdf')
    @login.success_message_present?.should be_false
    #@login.failure_message_present?.should be_true
  end

end
```

Now when we run this (`rspec login_spec.rb` from the command-line) it will run without error, and pass. Feel free to change the assertion back when you're done.
