# A Programming Primer

This section will prime you with just enough programming concepts (and how they pertain to Selenium) so you have some working knowledge and a vocabulary. This will help you more effectively comprehend what you will see throughout this book (and in your work afterwards).

Don't get too hung up on the details though. If something doesn't make sense it should once we dig into the full examples in the following chapters. Consider this more of a glossary than a code school.

## Installation

[Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/Download) is a phenomenal Integrated Development Environment (IDE) for the Microsoft Development Ecosystem. It has everything you need.

Once installed, you'll want to install a couple of extension from the built-in marketplace in the IDE: [`C#`](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode.csharp) and [`.NET Core Test Explorer`](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=formulahendry.dotnet-test-explorer).

## Installing Third-Party Packages

All of the packages (a.k.a. libraries) used in this book are installed with [NuGet](https://www.nuget.org/). NuGet is a package manager for the Microsoft Development Ecosystem where developers can publish packages they've created and consumers (like us) can download and install them.

Getting set up is easy:

1. Install [the .NET SDK for your operating system](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/learn/dotnet/hello-world-tutorial/install) -- nuget comes bundled with it
2. Search NuGet for the package you want to install (like [Selenium](https://www.nuget.org/packages?q=selenium))
3. Open the page for the package you want to install
4. Copy the install command from the page
5. Paste it into the command line and run it

The primary packages we will be using throughout the book are:

+ [`Selenium.WebDriver`](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Selenium.WebDriver/)
+ [`Selenium.Support`](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Selenium.Support/)
+ [`NUnit`](https://www.nuget.org/packages/NUnit/)
+ [`NUnit3TestAdapter`](https://www.nuget.org/packages/NUnit3TestAdapter/)

To save time, you can create a new project using an NUnit template with the following command:

```sh
dotnet new nunit -n NUnit-Tests --framework netcoreapp2.0
```

## Programming Concepts In A Nutshell

Programming can be a deep and intimidating rabbit hole if you're new to it. But don't worry. When it comes to automated browser testing there is only a small subset of programming that we really need to know in order to get started. Granted, the more you know, the better off you'll be. But you don't need to know a whole lot in order to be effective right now.

Of all the programming concepts out there, here are the ones you'll need to pay attention right now:

+ Object Structures (Variables, Methods, and Classes)
+ Access Modifiers (public, protected, private, etc.)
+ Types of Objects (Strings, Integers, Booleans, etc.)
+ Actions (Assertions and Conditionals)
+ Attributes
+ Inheritance

Let's step through each and how they pertain to testing with Selenium.

### Object Structures

<u>Variables</u>

Variables are objects where you can store and retrieve values. They are created and referenced by a name that:

+ is not case sensitive
+ is not a keyword or reserved word in C#
+ starts with a letter

Since variable names are not case sensitive there are a lot of varied opinions out about how to write them (e.g., `camelCase`, `PascalCase`, `_underBarCase`). You can read various threads on the topic [here](http://programmers.stackexchange.com/questions/1890/how-do-you-name-your-private-variables-in-c), [here](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/14967/are-there-any-suggestions-for-developing-a-c-sharp-coding-standards-best-pract/14974), and [here](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/3136594/naming-convention-underscore-in-c-and-c-sharp-variables). There's really no one specific code style. It's really just a matter of opinion. If you're working on a team that has their own preference, go with it. If not, then start with something simple that works for you.

You can store a value in a variable by using an equals sign (e.g., `=`). You can either specify the type of the object or let C# figure out what the type is through type inference.

```csharp
string ExampleVariable1 = "string value";
Console.WriteLine(ExampleVariable1);
// outputs: string value

var ExampleVariable2 = 42;
Console.WriteLine(ExampleVariable2);
// outputs: 42
```

__NOTE: In the code snippet above we're using `Console.WriteLine();` to output a message. This is a common command that is useful for generating output to the console (a.k.a. terminal window).__

In Selenium, a common example of variable usage is storing an element (or a value from an element) in the beginning of a test to be referenced later on. For example, getting a page's title.

```csharp
string PageTitle = Driver.Title();
```

__NOTE: `Driver` is the variable we will use to interact with Selenium throughout the book. More on that later.__

<u>Methods</u>

Throughout our tests we'll want to group common actions together for easy reuse. We do this by placing them into methods. We define a method within a class (more on those next) by specifying a modifier (which we'll cover in `Access Modifiers`), a return type, and a name.

A return type is used to specify what type of an object you want to return after the method is executed (more on Object Types in a bit). If you don't want to return anything, specify the return type as `void`.

Method names typically start with a capital letter and are PascalCase (e.g., each word is capitalized). The biggest difference between method and variable names is that method names tend to be a verb (since they denote some kind of an action to be performed). Also, the contents of the method are wrapped in opening and closing brackets (e.g., `{}`).

```csharp
public void SayHello() {
  // your code goes here
}
```

Additionally, you can make a method accept an argument when calling it. This is done with a parameter.

```csharp
public void SayHello(string message) {
  Console.WriteLine(message);
}
```

We'll see methods put to use in numerous places in our test code. First and foremost each of our tests will use them when setting up and tearing down instances of Selenium.

```csharp
public void SetUp() {
    Driver = new FirefoxDriver();
}

public void TearDown() {
    Driver.Quit();
}
```

<u>Classes</u>

Classes are a useful way to store the state and behavior of something complex for reuse. They are where variables and methods live. And they're defined with the word `class` followed by the name you wish to give it. Class names:

+ should start with a capital letter
+ should be PascalCase for multiple words (e.g., class ExampleClass)
+ should be descriptive (e.g., a noun or noun phrase)

To use a class you first have to define it. You then create an instance of it (a.k.a. instantiation). Once you have a class instance you can access the methods within it to trigger an action.

The most common example of this in Selenium is when you want to represent a page of the application you're testing (a.k.a. a page object). In the page object class you store the elements from the page you want to use (a.k.a. state) in variables and the actions you can perform with those elements (a.k.a. behavior) in methods.

```csharp
// 1. Code in a page object class
namespace PageObjects
{
    class LoginPage
    {
        IWebDriver Driver;
        By UsernameInput = By.Id("username");
        By PasswordInput = By.Id("password");
        By SubmitButton = By.CssSelector("button");
        By SuccessMessage = By.CssSelector(".flash.success");

        public void With(string username, string password)
// ...

// 2. Code in a test that uses the page object class
LoginPage Login = new LoginPage
Login.With("username", "password");
```

### Access Modifiers

When specifying an object (e.g., a variable, method, or class) you can apply a modifier. This modifier denotes what else can access the object. This is also known as "scope".

For classes you can apply `public` or nothing. `public` makes the class visible to _all_ other classes (including those outside of the package or assembly). Specifying nothing sets the class scope to `internal` which makes the class available to just other classes in the same package.

For members of a class (e.g., variables and methods) you can use `public`, `protected`, `private`, and `internal`. There's also `protected internal`, but you're not likely to use it.

+ `public` and `internal` behave just like they do with classes
+ `private` makes it so the member can only be accessed from within the class it was specified
+ `protected` makes it so the member can only be accessed from within the class it was specified and from a derivative class (more on inheritance later)

The best thing to do is to follow a "need-to-know" principle for your class members. Start with a `private` scope and only elevate it when appropriate (e.g., from `private` to `protected`, from `protected` to `public`, etc.).

In our Selenium tests, we'll end up with various modifiers for our objects.

```csharp
// When creating a test method it needs to be public for NUnit to use it
    [Test]
    public void ValidAccount()
    {
```

### Types of Objects

Objects can be of various types, and when declaring a method we need to specify what type it will return. If it returns nothing, we specify `void`. But if it returns something (e.g., a boolean) then we need to specify that.

The two most common types of objects we'll see initially in our tests are strings and booleans. Strings are a series of alpha-numeric characters stored in double-quotes. Booleans are a `true` or `false` value.

A common example of specifying a return type in our test code is when we use Selenium to see if something is displayed on a page.

```csharp
    public bool SuccessMessagePresent()
    {
        return Driver.FindElement(SuccessMessage).Displayed;
    }
```

After specifying the return type when declaring the method (e.g., `public bool`) we use the `return` keyword in the method body to return the final value.

### Actions

A benefit of booleans is that we can use them to perform an assertion.

<u>Assertions</u>

An assertion is a function that allows us to test assumptions about our application and notify us if there are any unexpected differences.

A common example of this is testing the login functionality of an application. After logging in we could check to see if a specific element is displayed on the page (e.g., a sign out button, a success notification, etc.). We could use this element to perform a display check which would return a boolean value. We would use this value to assert that it is what we expect (e.g., `true`). If it is `true`, then the test passes. If it's not `true`, then the test fails.

```csharp
// A method that looks to see if a success message is displayed after logging in
    public bool SuccessMessagePresent() {
        return Driver.FindElement(SuccessMessage).Displayed;
    }

// An assertion in our test to see if the value returned is the value expected
    Assert.That(Login.SuccessMessagePresent());
```

<u>Conditionals</u>

In addition to assertions, we can also leverage booleans in conditionals. Conditionals (a.k.a. control flow statements) are a way to break up the flow of code so that only certain chunks of it are executed based on predefined criteria. The most common control flow statements we'll use are `if`, `else`, `switch`/`case`.

The most common use of this will be in how we configure Selenium to run different browsers.

```csharp
    switch (BrowserName.ToLower())
    {
        case "firefox":
            Driver = new FirefoxDriver();
            break;
        case "chrome":
            Driver = new ChromeDriver(VendorDirectory);
            break;
    }
```

### Attributes

Attributes are a form of metadata. They are used by various libraries to enable additional functionality.

The most common use of attributes in our tests is when specifying different types of methods (e.g., a setup method, a teardown method, a test method, etc.) to be run at different times in our test execution.

```csharp
// Methods in a test file

    [SetUp]
    // this method will run before each test
    public void SetUp()
    {
        Driver = new FirefoxDriver();
    }

    [TearDown]
    // this method will run after each test
    public void TearDown()
    {
        Driver.Quit();
    }

    [Test]
    // This method is a test
    public void ValidAccount()
    {
```

### Inheritance

Classes have the ability to connect to one-another through parent/child inheritance. By having a single parent class we can store common actions in methods that can be readily available to all child classes.

Inheritance is done when declaring a child class by:

+ using the `:` symbol
+ providing the name of the parent class

```csharp
    class Parent {
      static string HairColor = "brown";
    }

    Child : Parent {
      public void Child() {
        Console.WriteLine(HairColor);
      }
    }

// Creating an instance of the Child class outputs "brown"
```

We'll see this a couple of times in our test code when we start writing easier to maintain code (e.g., grouping common Selenium actions into methods within a parent class for our page objects, or storing central setup and teardown functionality into a base test). More on this in Chapters 9 and 11.

## Additional Resources

Here are some additional resources that can help you continue your C# learning journey.

+ [Getting Started with C# on MSDN](https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/a72418yk.aspx)
+ [C# Tutorial on tutorialspoint](http://www.tutorialspoint.com/csharp/)
+ [C# in a Nutshell: The Definitive Reference](https://www.amazon.com/C-6-0-Nutshell-Definitive-Reference/dp/1491927062/ref=pd_sbs_14_1)
+ [Learn C# Programming Udemy course](https://www.udemy.com/learn-c-sharp-programming-in-ten-easy-steps/)
+ [LinkedIn Learning C# Training](https://www.linkedin.com/learning/learning-c-sharp-3)
+ [Pluralsight C# Course](https://www.pluralsight.com/courses/csharp-6-from-scratch)


