# Writing Re-usable Test Code

One of the biggest challenges with Selenium tests is that they can be brittle and challenging to maintain over time. This is largely due to the fact that things in the application you're testing change -- causing your tests to break.

But the reality of a software project is that _change is a constant_. So we need to account for this reality somehow in our test code in order to be successful.

Enter Page Objects.

## A Page Objects Primer

Rather than write your test code directly against your app, you can model the behavior of your application into simple objects and write your tests against them instead. That way when your app changes and your tests break, you only have to update your test code in one place to fix it.

With this approach we not only get the benefit of controlled chaos, we also get reusable functionality across our suite of tests and more readable tests.

## An Example

### Part 1: Create A Page Object And Update Test

Let's take our login example from earlier, create a page object for it, and update our test accordingly.

First we'll need to create a new folder called `PageObjects` in the root of our project (just like we did for `Tests`). Then let's add a file to the `PageObjects` directory called `LoginPage.cs`. When we're done our directory structure should look like this.

```text
├── PageObjects
│   └── LoginPage.cs
├── Tests
│   └── LoginTest.cs
└── Vendor
    └── geckodriver.exe
```

And here's the code that goes with it.

```csharp
// filename: PageObjects/LoginPage.cs
using OpenQA.Selenium;

namespace PageObjects
{
    class LoginPage
    {
        IWebDriver Driver;
        By UsernameInput = By.Id("username");
        By PasswordInput = By.Id("password");
        By SubmitButton = By.CssSelector("button");
        By SuccessMessage = By.CssSelector(".flash.success");

        public LoginPage(IWebDriver driver)
        {
            Driver = driver;
            Driver.Navigate().GoToUrl("http://the-internet.herokuapp.com/login");
        }

        public void With(string username, string password)
        {
            Driver.FindElement(UsernameInput).SendKeys(username);
            Driver.FindElement(PasswordInput).SendKeys(password);
            Driver.FindElement(SubmitButton).Click();
        }

        public bool SuccessMessagePresent()
        {
            return Driver.FindElement(SuccessMessage).Displayed;
        }

    }
}

```

At the top of the file we include Selenium and specify the namespace (which is the same as the folder name of where the file lives). We then declare the class (e.g., `class Login`), specify our field variables (for the Selenium instance and the page's locators), and add three methods.

The first method (e.g., `public LoginPage(IWebDriver driver)`) is the constructor. It will run whenever a new instance of this class is created. In order for this class to work we need access to the Selenium driver object, so we accept it as a parameter here and store it in the `Driver` field (so other methods can access it). Then the login page is visited (with `Driver.Navigate().GoToUrl`).

The second method (e.g., `public void With(string username, string password)`) is the core functionality of the login page. It's responsible for filling in the login form and submitting it. By accepting string parameters for the username and password we're able to make the functionality here reusable for additional tests.

The last method (e.g., `public bool SuccessMessagePresent()`) is the display check from earlier that was used in our assertion. It will return a Boolean result just like before.

Now let's update our test to use this page object.

```csharp
// filename: Tests/LoginTest.cs
using System;
using NUnit.Framework;
using OpenQA.Selenium;
using OpenQA.Selenium.Firefox;
using PageObjects;

namespace Tests
{
    [TestFixture]
    class LoginTest
    {
        private static string VendorDirectory = System.IO.Directory.GetParent(
            System.AppContext.BaseDirectory).
            Parent.Parent.Parent.FullName
            + @"/vendor";
        IWebDriver Driver;
        LoginPage Login;

        [SetUp]
        public void SetUp()
        {
            var Service = FirefoxDriverService.CreateDefaultService(VendorDirectory);
            Driver = new FirefoxDriver(Service);
            Login = new LoginPage(Driver);
        }

        [TearDown]
        public void TearDown()
        {
            Driver.Quit();
        }

        [Test]
        public void ValidAccount()
        {
            Login.With("tomsmith", "SuperSecretPassword!");
            Assert.That(Login.SuccessMessagePresent);
        }
    }
}
```

Since the page objects are in another namespace we need to include it (e.g., `using PageObjects;`).

Then it's a simple matter of specifying a field variable for the page object (e.g., `LoginPage Login`), creating an instance of it in our `SetUp()` method (passing the `Driver` object to it as an argument), and updating the test with the new actions.

Now the test is more concise and readable. And when you save everything and run it, it will run and pass just like before.

### Part 2: Write Another Test

Creating a page object may feel like more work than what we started with initially. But it's well worth the effort since we're in a much sturdier position and able easily write follow-on tests (since the specifics of the page are abstracted away for simple reuse).

Let's add another test for a failed login to demonstrate.

First, let's take a look at the markup that gets rendered when we provide invalid credentials:

```html
<div id="flash-messages" class="large-12 columns">
  <div data-alert="" id="flash" class="flash error">
    Your username is invalid!
    <a href="#" class="close">x</a>
  </div>
</div>
```

Here is the element we'll want to use in our assertion.

```html
class="flash error"
```

Let's add a locator for this element to our page object along with a new method to perform a display check against it.

```csharp
//filename: PageObjects/LoginPage.cs
// ...
        By FailureMessage = By.CssSelector(".flash.error");
// ...
        public bool FailureMessagePresent()
        {
            return Driver.FindElement(FailureMessage).Displayed;
        }
    }
}
```

Now we're ready to add a test for failed login to our `Tests/LoginTest.cs` file.

```csharp
//filename: Tests/LoginTest.cs
// ...

        [Test]
        public void BadPasswordProvided()
        {
            Login.With("tomsmith", "bad password");
            Assert.That(Login.FailureMessagePresent);
        }
    }
}
```

If we save these changes and run our tests we will see two browser windows open (one after the other) testing for successful and failure login scenarios.

## Why Asserting False Won't Work (yet)

You may be wondering why we didn't just check to see if the success message wasn't present in our assertion.

```csharp
Assert.That(Login.SuccessMessagePresent, Is.False);
```

There are two problems with this approach. First, our test will fail. This is because Selenium errors when it looks for an element that's not present on the page -- which looks like this:

```sh
Result StackTrace:
Result Message: OpenQA.Selenium.NoSuchElementException : Unable to locate element: {"method":"css selector","selector":".flash.success"}
```

But don't worry, we'll address this in the next chapter.

Second, the absence of a success message doesn't necessarily indicate a failed login. The assertion we ended up with originally is more effective.

## Part 3: Confirm We're In The Right Place

Before we can call our page object finished, there's one more addition we should make. We'll want to add an assertion to make sure that Selenium is in the right place before proceeding. This will help add some resiliency to our test.

```csharp
// filename: PagesObjects/LoginPage.cs
// ...
    class LoginPage
    {
        IWebDriver Driver;
        By LoginForm = By.Id("login");
// ...
        public LoginPage(IWebDriver driver)
        {
            Driver = driver;
            Driver.Navigate().GoToUrl("http://the-internet.herokuapp.com/login");
            if (!Driver.FindElement(LoginForm).Displayed)
            {
                throw new System.Exception("Page not ready");
            }
        }
// ...
```

After adding a locator for the center-piece of this page (the login form) we put it to use in our constructor after the Selenium command that visits the page. With it we're checking to see that the login form is displayed. If it is the tests using this page object will proceed. If not an error will be throw, failing the test, with a message stating that the page wasn't ready.

Now when we save everything and run our tests they will run just like before. But now we can feel confident that the tests will only proceed if login page is in a ready state.

## Outro

With Page Objects you'll be able to easily maintain and extend your tests. But how you write your Page Objects may vary depending on your preference and experience. The example demonstrated above is a simple approach. It's worth taking a look at the Selenium project wiki page for Page Objects [here](https://github.com/SeleniumHQ/selenium/wiki/PageObjects) (even if its examples are only written in Java). There's also Martin Fowler's seminal blog post on the topic as well ([link](http://martinfowler.com/bliki/PageObject.html)).


